Of late, I have come to sense within myself an accumulation of all kinds of things that cannot find adequate
expression via an objective artistic form such as the
novel. A lyric poet of twenty might manage it, but I am
twenty no longer, and have never been a poet at any
rate. I have groped around, therefore, for some other
form more suited to such personal utterances and have
come up with a kind of hybrid between confession and
criticism, a subtly equivocal mode that one might call
“confidential criticism.”
I see it as a twilight genre between the night of confession and the daylight of criticism. The “I” with which
I shall occupy myself will not be the “I” that relates back
strictly to myself, but something else, some residue, that
remains after all the other words I have uttered have
flowed back into me, something that neither relates back
nor flows back.
As I pondered the nature of that “I,” I was driven to
the conclusion that the “I” in question corresponded
precisely with the physical space that I occupied. What
I was seeking, in short, was a language of the body
If my self was my dwelling, then my body resembled
an orchard that surrounded it. I could either cultivate
that orchard to its capacity or leave it for the weeds to
run riot in. I was free to choose, but the freedom was
not as obvious as it might seem. Many people, indeed,
go so far as to refer to the orchards of their dwellings
as “destiny.”
6
One day, it occurred to me to set about cultivating my
orchard for all I was worth. For my purpose, I used sun
and steel. Unceasing sunlight and implements fashioned
of steel became the chief elements in my husbandry.
Little by little, the orchard began to bear fruit, and
thoughts of the body came to occupy a large part of my
consciousness.
All this did not occur, of course, overnight. Nor did it
begin without the existence of some deep-lying motive.
When I examine closely my early childhood, I realise
that my memory of words reaches back far farther than
my memory of the flesh. In the average person, I imagine,
the body precedes language. In my case, words came
first of all; then—belatedly, with every appearance of
extreme reluctance, and already clothed in concepts—
came the flesh. It was already, as goes without saying,
sadly wasted by words.
First comes the pillar of plain wood, then the white
ants that feed on it. But for me, the white ants were there
from the start, and the pillar of plain wood emerged
tardily, already half eaten away.
Let the reader not chide me for comparing my own
trade to the white ant. In its essence, any art that relies
on words makes use of their ability to eat away—of
their corrosive function—just as etching depends on
the corrosive power of nitric acid. Yet the simile is not
accurate enough; for the copper and the nitric acid used
in etching are on a par with each other, both being
extracted from nature, while the relation of words to
reality is not that of the acid to the plate. Words are a
medium that reduces reality to abstraction for transmission to our reason, and in their power to corrode reality
7
inevitably lurks the danger that the words themselves
will be corroded too. It might be more appropriate, in
fact, to liken their action to that of excess stomach fluids
that digest and gradually eat away the stomach itself.
Many people will express disbelief that such a process
could already be at work in a person’s earliest years.
But that, beyond doubt, is what happened to me personally, thereby laying the ground for two contradictory
tendencies within myself. One was the determination to
press ahead loyally with the corrosive function of words,
and to make that my life’s work. The other was the desire
to encounter reality in some field where words should
play no part at all.
In a more “healthy” process of development, the two
tendencies can often work together without conflict,
even in the case of a born writer, giving rise to a highly
desirable state of affairs in which a training in words
leads to a fresh discovery of reality. But the emphasis
here is on rediscovery; if this is to happen, it is necessary,
at the outset of life, to have possessed, the reality of the
flesh still unsullied by words. And that is quite different
from what happened to me.
My composition teacher would often show his displeasure with my work, which was innocent of any
words that might be taken as corresponding to reality.
It seems that, in my childish way, I had an unconscious
presentiment of the subtle, fastidious laws of words, and
was aware of the necessity of avoiding as far as possible
coming into contact with reality via words if one was to
profit from their positive corrosive function and escape
their negative aspect—if, to put it more simply, one was
to maintain the purity of words. I knew instinctively that
8
the only possibility was to maintain a constant watch
on the corrosive action lest it suddenly come up against
some object that it might corrode.
The natural corollary of such a tendency was that
I should openly admit the existence of reality and the
body only in fields where words had no part whatsoever;
thus reality and the body became synonymous for me,
the objects, almost, of a kind of fetishism. Without doubt,
too, I was quite unconsciously expanding my interest
in words to embrace this interest also; and this type of
fetishism corresponded exactly to my fetish for words.
In the first stage, I was quite obviously identifying
myself with words and setting reality, the flesh, and
action on the other side. There is no doubt, either, that
my prejudice concerning words was encouraged by this
willfully created antinomy, and that my deep-rooted
misunderstanding of the nature of reality, the flesh, and
action was formed in the same way.
This antinomy rested on the assumption that I myself
from the outset was devoid of the flesh, of reality, of
action. It was true, indeed, that the flesh came late to me
at the beginning, but I was waiting for it with words.
I suspect that because of the earlier tendency I spoke
of, I did not perceive it, then, as “my body.” If I had done
so, my words would have lost their purity. I should have
been violated by reality, and reality would have become
inescapable.
Interestingly enough, my stubborn refusal to perceive the body was itself due to a beautiful misconception in
my idea of what the body was. I did not know that a
man’s body never shows itself as “existence.” But as I saw
things, it ought to have made itself apparent, clearly and
9
unequivocally, as existence. It naturally followed that
when it did show itself unmistakably as a terrifying
paradox of existence—as a form of existence that rejected existence—I was as panic-stricken as though I had
come across some monster, and loathed it accordingly.
It never occurred to me that other men—all men without
exception—were the same.
It is perhaps only natural that this type of panic and
fear, though so obviously the product of a misconception,
should postulate another more desirable physical existence, another more desirable reality. Never dreaming
that the body existing in a form that rejected existence
was universal in the male, I set about constructing my
ideal hypothetical physical existence by investing it
with all the opposite characteristics. And since my own,
abnormal bodily existence was doubtless a product of
the intellectual corrosion of words, the ideal body—the
ideal existence—must, I told myself, be absolutely free
from any interference by words. Its characteristics could
be summed up as taciturnity and beauty of form.
At the same time, I decided that if the corrosive power
of words had any creative function, it must find its model
in the formal beauty of this “ideal body,” and that the
ideal in the verbal arts must lie solely in the imitation
of such physical beauty—in other words, the pursuit of
a beauty that was absolutely free from corrosion.
This was an obvious self-contradiction, since it represented an attempt to deprive words of their essential
function and to strip reality of its essential characteristics.
Yet, in another sense, it was an exceedingly clever and
artful method of ensuring that words and the reality
they should have dealt with never came face to face.
10
In this way my mind, without realizing what it was
doing, straddled these two contradictory elements and,
godlike, set about trying to manipulate them. It was thus
that I started writing novels. And this increased still
further my thirst for reality and the flesh.
11
Later, much later, thanks to the sun and the steel, I was
to learn the language of the flesh, much as one might
learn a foreign language. It was my second language,
an aspect of my spiritual development. My purpose now
is to talk of that development. As a personal history, it
will, I suspect, be unlike anything seen before, and as
such exceedingly difficult to follow.
When I was small, I would watch the young men
parade the portable shrine through the streets at the
local shrine festival. They were intoxicated with their
task, and their expressions were of an indescribable abandon, their faces averted; some of them even rested the
backs of their necks against the shafts of the shrine they
shouldered, so that their eyes gazed up at the heavens.
And my mind was much troubled by the riddle of what
it was that those eyes reflected.
As to the nature of the intoxicating vision that I detected in all this violent physical stress, my imagination
provided no clue. For many a month, therefore, the enigma continued to occupy my mind; it was only much later,
after I had begun to learn the language of the flesh, that
I undertook to help in shouldering a portable shrine,
and was at last able to solve the puzzle that had plagued
me since infancy. They were simply looking at the sky.
In their eyes there was no vision: only the reflection of
the blue and absolute skies of early autumn.. Those blue
skies, though, were unusual skies such as I might never
see again in my life: one moment strung up high aloft,
12
the next plunged to the depths; constantly shifting, a
strange compound of lucidity and madness.
I promptly set down what I had discovered in a short
essay, so important did my experience seem to me.
In short, I had found myself at a point where there
were no grounds for doubting that the sky that my own
poetic intuition had shown me, and the sky revealed to
the eyes of those ordinary young men of the neighborhood, were identical. That moment for which I had been
waiting so long was a blessing that the sun and the
steel had conferred on me. Why, you may ask, were there
no grounds for doubt ? Because, provided certain physical conditions are equal and a certain physical burden
shared, so long as an equal physical stress is savored
and an identical intoxication overtakes all alike, then
differences of individual sensibility are restricted by
countless factors to an absolute minimum. If, in addition,
the introspective element is removed almost completely—then one is safe in asserting that what I had witnessed was no individual illusion, but one fragment of
a well-defined group vision. My “poetic intuition” did
not become a personal privilege until later, when I used
words to recall and reconstruct that vision; my eyes, in
their meeting with the blue sky, had penetrated to the
essential pathos of the doer.
And in that swaying blue sky that, like a fierce bird of
prey with wings outstretched, alternately swept down
and soared upwards to infinity, I perceived the true
nature of what I had long referred to as “tragic.”
According to my definition of tragedy, the tragic
pathos is born when the perfectly average sensibility
momentarily takes unto itself a privileged nobility that
13
keeps others at a distance, and not when a special type
of sensibility vaunts its own special claims. It follows
that he who dabbles in words can create tragedy, but
cannot participate in it. It is necessary, moreover, that
the “privileged nobility” find its basis strictly in a kind
of physical courage. The elements of intoxication and
superhuman clarity in the tragic are born when the average sensibility, endowed with a given physical strength,
encounters that type of privileged moment especially
designed for it. Tragedy calls for an anti-tragic vitality
and ignorance, and above all for a certain “inappropriateness.” If a person is at times to draw close to the divine,
then under normal conditions he must be neither divine
nor anything approaching it.
It was only when I, in my turn, saw the strange, divine
blue sky perceived only by that type of person, that I at
last trusted the universality of my own sensibility, that
my thirst was slaked, and that my morbidly blind faith
in words was dispelled. At that moment, I participated
in the tragedy of all being.
Once I had gazed upon this sight, I understood all
kinds of things hitherto unclear to me. The exercise of
the muscles elucidated the mysteries that words had
made. It was similar to the process of acquiring erotic
knowledge. Little by little, I began to understand the
feeling behind existence and action.
If that were all, it would merely mean that I had
trodden somewhat belatedly the same path as other
people. I had another scheme of my own, however.
Insofar as the spirit was concerned—I told myself—
there was nothing especially out of the way in the idea of
some particular thought invading my spirit, enlarging it,
14
and eventually occupying the whole of it. Since, however,
I was gradually beginning to weary of the dualism of
flesh and spirit, it naturally occurred to me to wonder
why such an incident should occur within the spirit and
come to an end at its outer fringes. There are, of course,
many cases of psychosomatic diseases where the spirit
extends its domain to the body. But what I was considering went further than this. Granted that my flesh in
infancy had made itself apparent in intellectual guise,
corroded by words, then should it not be possible to
reverse the process—to extend the scope of an idea from
the spirit to the flesh until the whole physical being
became a suit of armor forged from the metal of that
concept ?
The idea in question, as I have already suggested in
my definition of tragedy, resolved itself into the concept
of the body. And it seemed to me that the flesh could
be “intellectualized” to a higher degree, could achieve a
closer intimacy with ideas, than the spirit.
For ideas are, in the long run, essentially foreign
to human existence; and the body—receptacle of the
involuntary muscles, of the internal organs and circulatory system over which it has no control—is foreign to
the spirit, so that it is even possible for people to use the
body as a metaphor for ideas, both being something quite
alien to human existence as such. And the way in which
an idea can take possession of the mind unbidden, with
the suddenness of a stroke of fate, reinforces still further
the resemblance of ideas to the body with which each of
us, willy-nilly, is endowed, giving even this automatic,
uncontrollable function a striking resemblance to the
flesh. It is this that forms the basis of the idea of the
15
enfleshment of Christ and also the stigmata some people
can produce on their palms and insteps.
Nevertheless, the flesh has its limitations. Even should
some eccentric idea require that a man sprout a pair of
formidable horns on his head, they would obviously
refuse to grow. The limiting factors, ultimately, are the
harmony and balance on which the body insists. All
these do is to provide beauty of the most average kind
and the physical qualifications necessary for viewing
that swaying sky of the shrine-bearers. They also, it
seems, fulfill the function of taking revenge on, and correcting, any excessively eccentric idea. And they constantly draw one back to the point at which there is no
longer any room to doubt “one’s identity with others.”
In this way, my body, while itself the product of an idea,
would doubtless also serve as the best cloak with which
to hide the idea. If the body could achieve perfect, nonindividual harmony, then it would be possible to shut
individuality up for ever in close confinement. I had
always felt that such signs of physical individuality as a
bulging belly (sign of spiritual sloth) or a flat chest with
protruding ribs (sign of an unduly nervous sensibility)
were excessively ugly, and I could not contain my surprise when I discovered that there were people who
loved such signs. To me, these could only seem acts of
shameless indecency, as though the owner were exposing his spiritual pudenda on the outside of his body.
They represented one type of narcissism that I could
never forgive.
The theme of the estrangement of body and spirit,
born of the craving I have described, persisted for a long
time as a principal theme in my work. I only came to
16
take gradual leave of it when I at last began to consider
whether it was not possible that the body, too, might
have its own logic, possibly even its own thought; when
I began to feel that the body’s special qualities did not
lie solely in taciturnity and beauty of form, but that the
body too might have its own loquacity.
When I describe in this fashion the shifts in these
two trains of thought, the reader will surely say that
I merely start by taking what were, if anything, generally
accepted premises and get involved in a maze of illogicality. The estrangement of body and spirit in modern
society is an almost universal phenomenon, and there
is nobody—the reader may feel—who would fail to deplore it; so that to prate emotionally about the body
“thinking” or the “loquacity” of the flesh is going too
far, and by using such phrases I am merely covering up
my own confusion.
In fact, by setting my fetish for reality and physical
existence and my fetish for words on the same level, by
making them an exact equation, I had already brought
into sight the discovery I was to make later. From the
moment I set the wordless body, full of physical beauty,
in opposition to beautiful words that imitated physical
beauty, thereby equating them as two things springing
from one and the same conceptual source, I had in effect,
without realizing it, already released myself from the
spell of words. For it meant that I was recognizing the
identical origin of the formal beauty in the wordless
body and the formal beauty in words, and was beginning
to seek a kind of platonic idea that would make it possible
to put the flesh and words on the same footing. At that
stage, the attempt to project words onto the body was
17
already only a stone’s throw away. The attempt itself,
of course, was strikingly unplatonic, but there remained
only one more experience for me to pass through before
I could start to talk of the ideas of the flesh and the
loquacity of the body.
In order to explain what that was, I must start by
describing the encounter between myself and the sun.
In fact, this experience occurred on two occasions. It
often happens that, long before the decisive meeting with
a person from whom only death can thereafter part one,
there is a brief brush elsewhere with that same person
occurring with almost total unawareness on both sides.
So it was with my encounter with the sun.
My first—unconscious—encounter was in the summer of the defeat, in the year 1945. A relentless sun
blazed down on the lush grass of that summer that lay
on the borderline between the war and the postwar
period—a borderline, in fact, that was nothing more
than a line of barbed wire entanglements, half broken
down, half buried in the summer weeds, tilting in all
directions. I walked in the sun’s rays, but had no clear
understanding of the meaning they held for me.
Finespun and impartial, the summer sunlight poured
down prodigally on all creation alike. The war ended, yet
the deep green weeds were lit exactly as before by the
merciless light of noon, a clearly perceived hallucination
stirring in a slight breeze; brushing the tips of the leaves
with my fingers, I was astonished that they did not
vanish at my touch.
That same sun, as the days turned to months and the
months to years, had become associated with a pervasive
corruption and destruction. In part, it was the way it
18
gleamed so encouragingly on the wings of planes leaving
on missions, on forests of bayonets, on the badges of
military caps, on the embroidery of military banners;
but still more, far more, it was the way it glistened on
the blood flowing ceaselessly from the flesh, and on the
silver bodies of flies clustering on wounds. Holding sway
over corruption, leading youth in droves to its death in
tropical seas and countrysides, the sun lorded it over that
vast rusty-red ruin that stretched away to the distant
horizon.
I little dreamed—since the sun had never been disassociated from the image of death—that it could ever
confer on me a bodily blessing, even though it had, of
course, long harbored images of radiant glory…
I was already fifteen, and I had written a poem:
And still the light
Pours down; men laud the day.
I shun the sun and cast my soul
Into the shadowy pit.
How dearly, indeed, I loved my pit, my dusky room,
the area of my desk with its piles of books! How I enjoyed
introspection, shrouded myself in cogitation; with what
rapture did I listen for the rustling of frail insects in the
thickets of my nerves!
A hostility towards the sun was my only rebellion
against the spirit of the age. I hankered after Novalis’s
night and Yeatsian Irish twilights. However, from the
time the war ended, I gradually sensed that an era was
approaching in which to treat the sun as an enemy would
be tantamount to following the herd.
19
The literary works written or put before the public
around that time were dominated by night thoughts—
though their night was far less aesthetic than mine. To
be really respected at that time, moreover, one’s darkness
had to be rich and cloying, not thin. Even the rich honeyed
night in which I myself had wallowed in my boyhood
seemed to them, apparently, very thin stuff indeed.
Little by little, I began to feel uncertain about the
night in which I had placed such trust during the war,
and to suspect that I might have belonged with the sun
worshipers all along. It may well have been so. And if
it was indeed so—I began to wonder—might not my
persistent hostility towards the sun, and the continued
importance I attached to my own small private night,
be no more than a desire to follow the herd?
The men who indulged in nocturnal thought, it
seemed to me, had without exception dry, lusterless
skins and sagging stomachs. They sought to wrap up a
whole epoch in a capacious night of ideas, and rejected
in all its forms the sun that I had seen. They rejected
both life and death as I had seen them, for in both of
these the sun had had a hand.
It was in 1952, on the deck of the ship on which I made
my first journey abroad, that I exchanged a reconciliatory handshake with the sun. From that day on, I have
found myself unable to part company with it. The sun
became associated with the main highway of my life.
And little by little, it tanned my skin brown, branding
me as a member of the other race.
One might object that thought belongs, essentially,
to the night, that creation with words is of necessity
carried out in the fevered darkness of night. Indeed,
20
I had still not lost my old habit of working through the
small hours, and I was surrounded by people whose
skins unmistakably bore witness to nocturnal thinking.
Yet why must it be that men always seek out the
depths, the abyss ? Why must thought, like a plumb line,
concern itself exclusively with vertical descent? Why
was it not feasible for thought to change direction and
climb vertically up, ever up, towards the surface? Why
should the area of the skin, which guarantees a human
being’s existence in space, be most despised and left to
the tender mercies of the senses? I could not understand
the laws governing the motion of thought—the way it
was liable to get stuck in unseen chasms whenever it set
out to go deep; or, whenever it aimed at the heights, to
soar away into boundless and equally invisible heavens,
leaving the corporeal form undeservedly neglected.
If the law of thought is that it should search out profundity, whether it extends upwards or downwards, then
it seemed excessively illogical to me that men should
not discover depths of a kind in the “surface,” that vital
borderline that endorses our separateness and our form,
dividing our exterior from our interior. Why should they
not be attracted by the profundity of the surface itself ?
The sun was enticing, almost dragging, my thoughts
away from their night of visceral sensations, away to
the swelling of muscles encased in sunlit skin. And it
was commanding me to construct a new and sturdy
dwelling in which my mind, as it rose little by little to
the surface, could live in security. That dwelling was a
tanned, lustrous skin and powerful, sensitively-rippling
muscles. I came to feel that it was precisely because such
an abode was required that the average intellectual failed
21
to feel at home with thought that concerned itself with
forms and surfaces.
The nocturnal outlook, product of diseased inner
organs, is given shape almost before its owner is aware
which came first, the outlook itself or those first faint
morbid symptoms in the inner organs. And yet, in remote recesses invisible to the eye, the body slowly creates
and regulates its own thought. With the surface, on the
other hand, which is visible to everybody, training of
the body must take precedence over training of thought
if it is to create and supervise its own ideas.
The need for me to train my body could have been
foreseen from that moment when I first felt the attraction of the surface profundities. I was aware that the
only thing that could justify such an idea was muscle.
Who pays any attention to a physical education theorist
grown decrepit? One might accept the pallid scholar’s
toying with nocturnal thoughts in the privacy of his
study, but what could seem more meager, more chilly
than his lips were they to speak, whether in praise or
in blame, of the body? So well acquainted was I with
poverty of that type that one day, quite suddenly, it occurred to me to acquire ample muscles of my own.
I would draw attention here to one fact: that everything, as this shows, proceeded from my “mind.” I believe that just as physical training will transform supposedly involuntary muscles into voluntary ones, so a
similar transformation can be achieved through training
the mind. Both body and mind, through an inevitable
tendency that one might almost call a natural law, are
inclined to lapse into automatism, but I have found by
22
experience that a large stream may be deflected by digging a small channel.
This is another example of the quality that our spirits
and bodies have in common: that tendency shared by the
body and the mind to instantly create their own small
universe, their own “false order,” whenever, at one particular time, they are taken control of by one particular
idea. Although what happens in fact represents a kind
of standstill, it is experienced as though it were a burst
of lively, centripetal activity. This function of the body
and mind in creating for a short while their own miniature universes is, in fact, no more than an illusion; yet
the fleeting sense of happiness in human life owes much
to precisely this type of “false order.” It is a kind of
protective function of life in face of the chaos around it,
and resembles the way a hedgehog rolls itself up into a
tight round ball.
The possibility then presented itself of breaking
down one type of “false order” and creating another in
its place, of turning back on itself this obstinate formative function and resetting it in a direction that better
accorded with one’s own aims. This idea, I decided,
I would immediately put into action. Rather than “idea,”
though, I might have said the new purpose which the
sun provided me with each day.
It was thus that I found myself confronted with those
lumps of steel: heavy, forbidding, cold as though the
essence of night had in them been still further condensed.
23
On that day began my close relationship with steel that
was to last for ten years to come.
The nature of this steel is odd. I found that as I increased its weight little by little, the effect was like a
pair of scales: the bulk of muscles placed, as it were, on
the other pan increased proportionately, as though the
steel had a duty to maintain a strict balance between
the two. Little by little, moreover, the properties of my
muscles came increasingly to resemble those of the steel.
This slow development, I found, was remarkably similar
to the process of education, which remodels the brain
intellectually by feeding it with progressively more difficult matter. And since there was always the vision of
a classical ideal of the body to serve as a model and an
ultimate goal, the process closely resembled the classical
ideal of education.
And yet, which of the two was it that really resembled
the other ? Was I not already using words in my attempt
to imitate the classical physical type? For me, beauty
is always retreating from one’s grasp: the only thing
I consider important is what existed once, or ought to
have existed. By its subtle, infinitely varied operation,
the steel restored the classical balance that the body had
begun to lose, reinstating it in its natural form, the form
that it should have had all along.
The groups of muscles that have become virtually
unnecessary in modern life, though still a vital element
of a man’s body, are obviously pointless from a practical
24
point of view, and bulging muscles are as unnecessary as
a classical education is to the majority of practical men.
Muscles have gradually become something akin to classical Greek. To revive the dead language, the discipline
of the steel was required; to change the silence of death
into the eloquence of life, the aid of steel was essential.
The steel faithfully taught me the correspondence
between the spirit and the body: thus feeble emotions,
it seemed to me, corresponded to flaccid muscles, sentimentality to a sagging stomach, and overimpressionability to an oversensitive, white skin. Bulging muscles,
a taut stomach, and a tough skin, I reasoned, would
correspond respectively to an intrepid fighting spirit,
the power of dispassionate intellectual judgement, and
a robust disposition. I hasten to point out here that I do
not believe ordinary people to be like this. Even my own
scanty experience is enough to furnish me with innumerable examples of timid minds encased within bulging
muscles. Yet, as I have already pointed out, words for
me came before the flesh, so that intrepidity, dispassionateness, robustness, and all those emblems of moral character summed up by words, needed to manifest themselves in outward, bodily tokens. For that reason, I told
myself, I ought to endow myself with the physical characteristics in question as a kind of educative process.
Beyond the educative process there also lurked another,
romantic design. The romantic impulse that had formed
an undercurrent in me from boyhood on, and that made
sense only as the destruction of classical perfection, lay
waiting within me. Like a theme in an operatic overture
that is later destined to occur throughout the whole
25
work, it laid down a definitive pattern for me before
I had achieved anything in practice.
Specifically, I cherished a romantic impulse towards
death, yet at the same time I required a strictly classical
body as its vehicle; a peculiar sense of destiny made
me believe that the reason why my romantic impulse
towards death remained unfulfilled in reality was the immensely simple fact that I lacked the necessary physical
qualifications. A powerful, tragic frame and sculpturesque muscles were indispensable in a romantically noble
death. Any confrontation between weak, flabby flesh and
death seemed to me absurdly inappropriate. Longing at
eighteen for an early demise, I felt myself unfitted for
it. I lacked, in short, the muscles suitable for a dramatic
death. And it deeply offended my romantic pride that
it should be this unsuitability that had permitted me to
survive the war.
For all that, these purely intellectual convolutions
were as yet nothing but the entangling of themes within
the prelude to a human life that so far had achieved
nothing. It remained for me some day to achieve something, to destroy something. That was where the steel
came in—it was the steel that gave me a clue as to how
to do so.
At the point at which many people feel satisfied with
the degree of intellectual cultivation they have already
achieved, I was fated to discover that in my case the intellect, far from being a harmless cultural asset, had been
granted me solely as a weapon, as a means of survival.
Thus the physical disciplines that later became so necessary to my survival were in a sense comparable to the
way in which a person for whom the body has been the
26
only means of living launches into a frantic attempt to
acquire an intellectual education when his youth is on
its deathbed.
The steel taught me many different things. It gave
me an utterly new kind of knowledge, a knowledge
that neither books nor worldly experience can impart.
Muscles, I found, were strength as well as form, and
each complex of muscles was subtly responsible for the
direction in which its own strength was exerted, much
as though they were rays of light given the form of flesh.
Nothing could have accorded better with the definition of a work of art that I had long cherished than this
concept of form enfolding strength, coupled with the
idea that a work should be organic, radiating rays of
light in all directions.
The muscles that I thus created were at one and the
same time simple existence and works of art; they even,
paradoxically, possessed a certain abstract nature. Their
one fatal flaw was that they were too closely involved
with the life process, which decreed that they should
decline and perish with the decline of life itself.
This oddly abstract nature I will return to later; more
important here is the fact that, for me, muscles had one
of the most desirable qualities of all: their function was
precisely opposite to that of words. This will become
clear if one considers the origin of words themselves.
At first, in much the same way as stone coinage, words
become current among the members of a race as a universal means to the communication of emotions and
needs. So long as they remain unsoiled by handling,
they are common property, and they can, accordingly,
express nothing but commonly shared emotions.
27
However, as words become particularized, and as men
begin—in however small a way—to use them in personal,
arbitrary ways, so their transformation into an begins.
It was words of this kind that, descending on me like a
swarm of winged insects, seized on my individuality and
sought to shut me up within it. Nevertheless, despite the
enemy’s depredations upon my person, I turned their
universality—at once a weapon and a weakness—back
on them, and to some extent succeeded in using words
to universalize my own individuality.
Yet that success lay in being different from others,
and was essentially at variance with the origins and early
development of words. Nothing, in fact, is so strange as
the glorification of the verbal arts. Seeming at first
glance to strive after universality, in fact they concern
themselves with subtle ways of betraying the fundamental function of words, which is to be universally
applicable. The glorification of individual style in literature signifies precisely that. The epic poems of ancient
times are, perhaps, an exception, but every literary work
with its author’s name standing at its head is no more
than a beautiful “perversion of words.”
Can the blue sky that we all sec, the mysterious blue
sky that is seen identically by all the bearers of the festival shrine, ever be given verbal expression?
It was here, as I have already said, that my deepest
doubts lay; and conversely what I found in muscles,
through the intermediary of steel, was a burgeoning of
this type of triumph of the non-specific, the triumph of
knowing that one was the sane as others. As the relentless pressure of the steel progressively stripped my
muscles of their unusualness and individuality (which
28
were a product of degeneration), and as they gradually
developed, they should, I reasoned, begin to assume
a universal aspect, until finally they reached a point
where they conformed to a general pattern in which
individual differences ceased to exist. The universality
thus attained would suffer no private corrosion, no betrayal. That was its most desirable trait in my eyes.
In addition, those muscles, so apparent to the eye,
so palpable to the touch, began to acquire an abstract
quality all their own. Muscles, of which non-communication is the very essence, ought never in theory to acquire
the abstract quality common to means of communication. And yet…
One summer day, heated by training, I was cooling
my muscles in the breeze coming through an open window. The sweat vanished as though by magic, and coolness passed over the surface of the muscles like a touch
of menthol. The next instant, I was rid of the sense of
the muscles’ existence, and—in the same way that words,
by their abstract functioning, can grind up the concrete
world so that the words themselves seem never to have
existed—my muscles at that moment crushed something within my being, so that it was as though the
muscles themselves had similarly never existed.
What was it, then, that they had crushed?
It was that sense of existence in which we normally
believe in such a halfhearted manner, which they had
transformed into a kind of transparent sense of power.
It is this that I refer to as their “abstract nature.” As
my resort to the steel had persistently suggested to me,
the relationship of muscles to steel was one of interdependence: very similar, in fact, to the relationship
29
between ourselves and the world. In short, the sense of
existence by which strength cannot be strength without
some object represents the basic relationship between
ourselves and the world; it is precisely to that extent
that we depend on the world, and that I depended on
steel. Just as muscles slowly increase their resemblance
to steel, so we are gradually fashioned by the world;
and although neither the steel nor the world can very
well possess a sense of their own existence, idle analogy
leads us unwittingly into the illusion that both do, in
fact, possess such a sense. Otherwise, we feel powerless
to check up on our own sense of existence, and Atlas,
for example, would gradually come to regard the globe
on his shoulders as something akin to himself. Thus our
sense of existence seeks after some object, and can only
live in a false world of relativity.
It is true enough that when I lifted a certain weight of
steel, I was able to believe in my own strength. I sweated
and panted, struggling to obtain certain proof of my
strength. At such times, the strength was mine, and
equally it was the steel’s. My sense of existence was
feeding on itself.
Away from the steel, however, my muscles seemed
to lapse into absolute isolation, their bulging shapes
no more than cogs created to mesh with the steel. The
cool breeze passed, the sweat evaporated—and with
them the existence of the muscles vanished into thin air.
And yet, it was then that the muscles played their most
essential function, grinding up with their sturdy, invisible teeth that ambiguous, relative sense of existence and
substituting for it an unqualified sense of transparent,
peerless power that required no object at all. Even the
30
muscles themselves no longer existed. I was enveloped
in a sense of power as transparent as light.
It is scarcely to be wondered at that in this pure sense
of power that no amount of books or intellectual analysis
could ever capture, I should discover a true antithesis
of words. And indeed it was this that by gradual stages
was to become the focus of my whole thinking.
31
The formulation of any new way of thought begins with
the trial rephrasing in many different ways of a single,
as yet ambiguous theme. As the fisherman tries all kinds
of rods, and the fencer all kinds of bamboo swords until
he finds one whose length and weight suit him, so, in
the formulation of a way of thinking, an as yet imprecise
idea is given experimental expression in a variety of
forms; only when the right measurements and weight
are discovered does it become part of oneself.
When I experienced that pure sense of strength,
I had a presentiment that here at last was the future
focus of my thought. The idea gave me indescribable
pleasure, and I looked forward to dallying with it in
a leisurely fashion before appropriating it to myself
as a way of thinking. I would take my time, spinning
out the process, taking care to prevent the idea from
becoming set, and all the while experimenting with
various dif­ferent formulations. And by means of many
trials I would recapture that pure sensation and confirm
its nature—much as a dog, attracted by the basic aroma
of good food given off by a bone, prolongs the spell it is
under by playing with the bone.
For me, the attempts at rephrasing took the form of
boxing and fencing, about which I will say more later.
It was natural that my rephrasing of the pure sense of
strength should turn in the direction of the flash of the
fist and the stroke of the bamboo sword; for that which
lay at the end of the flashing fist, and beyond the blow
32
of the bamboo sword, was precisely what constituted
the most certain proof of that invisible light given off
by the muscles. It was an attempt to reach the “ultimate
sensation” that lies just a hairsbreadth beyond the reach
of the senses.
Something, I felt sure, lurked in the empty space that
lay there. Even with the aid of that sense of pure power,
it was possible only to reach a point one step this side of
that thing; with the intellect, or with artistic intuition, it
was not even possible to get within ten or twenty paces.
Art, admittedly, could probably give “expression” to it in
some form or other. Yet “expression” requires a medium;
in my case, it seemed, the abstract function of the words
that would serve as the medium had the effect of being
a barrier to everything else. And it seemed unlikely that
the act of expression would satisfy one who had been
motivated at the outset by doubts about that very act.
It is not surprising that an anathema for words should
draw one’s attention to the essentially dubious nature
of the act of expression. Why do we conceive the desire
to give expression to things that cannot be said—and
sometimes succeed? Such success is a phenomenon that
occurs when a subtle arrangement of words excites the
reader’s imagination to an extreme degree; at that moment, author and reader become accomplices in a crime
of the imagination. And when their complicity gives
rise to a work of literature—that “thing that is not a
thing”—people call it “creation” and inquire no further.
In actual fact, words, armed with their abstract function, originally put in their appearance as a working of
the logos designed to bring order to the chaos of the
world of concrete objects, and expression was essentially
33
an attempt to turn the abstract functioning back on
itself and, like an electric current that flows in reverse,
summon up a world of phenomena with the aid of words
alone. It was in accordance with this idea that I suggested earlier that all works of literature were a kind of
beautiful transformation of language. “Expression,” by
its very function, means the recreation of a world of
concrete objects using language alone.
How many lazy men’s truths have been admitted in
the name of imagination! How often has the term imagination been used to prettify the unhealthy tendency
of the soul to soar off in a boundless quest after truth,
leaving the body where it always was! How often have
men escaped from the pains of their own bodies with the
aid of that sentimental aspect of the imagination that
feels the ills of others’ flesh as its own! And how often
has the imagination unquestioningly exalted spiritual
sufferings whose relative value was in fact excessively
difficult to gauge! And when this type of arrogance of the
imagination links together the artist’s act of expression
and its accomplices, there comes into existence a kind of
fictional “thing”—the work of art—and it is this interference from a large number of such “things” that has
steadily perverted and altered reality. As a result, men
end up by coming into contact only with shadows and
lose the courage to make themselves at home with the
tribulations of their own flesh.
That which lurked beyond the flash of the fist and the
stroke of the fencing sword was at the opposite pole from
verbal expression—that much, at least, was apparent
from the feeling it conveyed of being the essence of
something extremely concrete, the essence, even, of
34
reality. In no sense at all could it be called “a shadow.”
Beyond the fist, beyond the tip of the bamboo sword, a
new reality had reared its head, a reality that rejected all
attempts to make it abstract—indeed, that flatly rejected
all expression of phenomena by resort to abstractions.
There, above all, lay the essence of action and of
power. That reality, in popular parlance, was referred
to quite simply as “the opponent.”
The opponent and I dwelt in the same world. When
I looked, the opponent was seen; when the opponent
looked, I was seen; we faced each other, moreover, without any intermediary imagination, both belonging to the
same world of action and strength—the world, that is,
of “being seen.” The opponent was in no sense an idea,
for although by climbing step by step up the ladder of
verbal expression in pursuit of an idea, and by gazing
intently at that idea, we may well succeed in blinding
ourselves to the light, that idea will never gaze back
at us. In a realm where at every moment one’s gaze is
returned, one is never given time to express things in
words. In order to express oneself, one needs to stand
outside the world in question. Since that world as a
whole never returns one’s scrutiny, one is given time
to look, and to express at leisure what one has found.
But one will never succeed in getting at the essence of
a reality that returns one’s gaze.
It was the opponent—the opponent that lurked in the
empty space beyond the flash of the fist and the blow of
the fencing sword, gazing back at one—that constituted
the true essence of things. Ideas do not stare back; tilings
do. Beyond verbal expressions, ideas can be seen flitting
behind the semi-transparency of the fictional things they
35
have achieved. Beyond action, one may glimpse, flitting
behind the semitransparent space it has achieved (the
opponent), the “thing.” To the man of action, that “thing”
appears as death, which bears down on him—the great
black bull of the toreador—without any agency of the
imagination.
Even so, I could not bring myself to believe in it except
when it appeared at the very extremity of consciousness;
I had perceived dimly, too, that the only physical proof
of the existence of consciousness was suffering. Beyond
doubt, there was a certain splendor in pain, which bore
a deep affinity to the splendor that lies hidden within
strength.
It is common experience that no technique of action
can become effective until repeated practice has drummed it into the unconscious areas of the mind. What
I was interested in, however, was something slightly
different. On the one hand, my desire to have pure experience of consciousness was staked on the body-strengthaction series, while on the other hand my passion for
pure experience was staked on the given moment when,
thanks to the reflex action of the pre-trained subconscious, the body put forth its highest skill. And the only
thing that truly attracted me was the point at which
these two mutually opposed attempts coincided—the
point of contact, in other words, at which the absolute
value of consciousness and the absolute value of the
body fitted exactly into each other.
The befuddling of the wits by means of drugs or
alcohol was not, of course, my aim. My only interest lay
in following consciousness through to its extreme limits,
so as to discover at what point it was converted into
36
unconscious power. That being so, what surer witness
to the persistence of consciousness to its outer limits
could I have found than physical suffering? There is
an undeniable interdependence between consciousness
and physical suffering, and consciousness, conversely,
affords the surest possible proof of the persistence of
bodily distress.
Pain, I came to feel, might well prove to be the sole
proof of the persistence of consciousness within the
flesh, the sole physical expression of consciousness. As
my body acquired muscle, and in turn strength, there
was gradually born within me a tendency towards the
positive acceptance of pain, and my interest in physical
suffering deepened. Even so, I would not have it believed
that this development was a result of the workings of
my imagination. My discovery was made directly, with
my body, thanks to the sun and the steel.
As many people must have experienced for themselves, the greater the accuracy of a blow from a boxing glove or a fencing sword, the more it is felt as a
counterblow rather than as a direct assault on the
opponent’s person. One’s own blow, one’s own strength,
creates a kind of hollow. A blow is successful if, at that
instant, the opponent’s body fits into that hollow in space
and assumes a form precisely identical with it.
How is it that a blow can be experienced in such a
way; what makes a blow successful? Success comes when
both the timing and placing of the blow are just right.
But more than this, it happens when the choice of time
and target—one’s judgement—manages to catch the
foe momentarily off guard, when one has an intuitive
apprehension of that off-guard moment a fraction of a
37
second before it becomes perceptible to the senses. This
apprehension is a quantity that is unknowable even
to the self and is acquired through a process of long
training. By the time the right moment is consciously
perceptible, it is already too late. It is too late, in other
words, when that which lurks in the space beyond the
flashing fist and the tip of the sword has taken shape.
By the moment it takes shape, it must already be snugly
ensconced in that hollow in space that one has marked
out and created. It is at this instant that victory in the
fray is born.
At the height of the fray, I found, the tardy process of
creating muscle, whereby strength creates form and form
creates strength, is repeated so swiftly that it becomes
imperceptible to the eye. Strength, that like light emitted
its own rays, was constantly renewed, destroying and
creating form as it went. I saw for myself how the form
that was beautiful and fitting overcame the form that was
ugly and imprecise. Its distortion invariably implied an
opening for the foe and a blurring of the rays of strength.
The defeat of the foe occurs when he accommodates
his form to the hollow in space that one has already
marked out; at that moment, one’s own form must preserve a constant precision and beauty. And the form
itself must have an extreme adaptability, a matchless
flexibility, so that it resembles a series of sculptures
created from moment to moment by a fluid body. The
continuous radiation of strength must create its own
shape, just as a continuous jet of water will maintain
the shape of a fountain.
Surely, I felt, the tempering by sun and steel to which
I submitted over such a long period was none other
38
than a process of creating this kind of fluid sculpture.
And insofar as the body thus fashioned belonged strictly to life, its whole value, I came to feel, must lie in
that moment-to-moment splendor. That, indeed, is the
reason why human sculpture has striven so hard to commemorate the momentary glory of the flesh in imperishable marble.
It followed that death lay only a short way beyond
that particular moment.
Here, I felt, I was gaining a clue to an inner understanding of the cult of the hero. The cynicism that
regards all hero worship as comical is always shadowed
by a sense of physical inferiority. Invariably, it is the
man who believes himself to be physically lacking in
heroic attributes who speaks mockingly of the hero;
and when he does so, how dishonest it is that his phraseology, partaking ostensibly of a logic so universal and
general, should not (or at least should be assumed by
the general public not to) give any clue to his physical
characteristics. I have yet to hear hero worship mocked
by a man endowed with what might justly be called
heroic physical attributes. Facile cynicism, invariably,
is related to feeble muscles or obesity, while the cult of
the hero and a mighty nihilism are always related to a
mighty body and well-tempered muscles. For the cult of
the hero is, ultimately, the basic principle of the body, and
in the long run is intimately involved with the contrast
between the robustness of the body and the destruction
that is death.
The body carries quite sufficient persuasion to
destroy the comic aura that surrounds an excessive selfawareness; for though a fine body may be tragic, there
39
is in it no trace of the comic. The thing that ultimately
saves the flesh from being ridiculous is the element of
death that resides in the healthy, vigorous body; it is
this, I realized, that sustains the dignity of the flesh.
How comic would one find the gaiety and elegance of
the bullfighter were his trade entirely divorced from
associations of death!
Nevertheless, whenever one sought after the ultimate
sensation, the moment of victory was always an insipid
sensation. Ultimately, the opponent—the “reality that
stares back at one”—is death. Since death, it seems, will
yield to no one, the glory of victory can be nothing
more than a purely worldly glory in its highest form.
And if it is only a worldly glory, I told myself, then one
ought to be able to secure something very similar to it
by resorting to the verbal arts.
Yet the thing that we sense in the finest sculpture—as
in the bronze charioteer of Delphi, where the glory, the
pride, and the shyness reflected in the moment of victory
are given faithful immortality—is the swift approach of
the spectre of death just on the other side of the victor. At
the same time, by showing us symbolically the limits of
spatiality in the art of sculpture, it intimates that nothing
but decline lies beyond the greatest human glory. The
sculptor, in his arrogance, has sought to capture life only
at its supreme moment.
If the solemnity and dignity of the body arise solely
from the element of mortality that lurks within it, then
the road that leads to death, I reasoned, must have some
private path connecting with pain, suffering, and the continuing consciousness that is proof of life. And I could
not help feeling that if there were some incident in which
40
violent death pangs and well-developed muscles were
skillfully combined, it could only occur in response to
the aesthetic demands of destiny. Not, of course, that
destiny often lends an ear to aesthetic considerations.
Even in my boyhood, I was not unfamiliar with
various types of physical distress, but the addled brains
and oversensitivity of adolescence confused them hopelessly with spiritual suffering. As a middle-school boy,
a forced march from Gora to Sengoku-bara, then over
Otome Pass to the plain at the foot of Mt. Fuji, was an
undoubted trial, but all I extracted from my tribulations was a passive, mental type of suffering. I lacked
the physical courage to seek out suffering for myself, to
take pain unto myself.
The acceptance of suffering as a proof of courage was
the theme of primitive initiation rites in the distant past,
and all such rites were at the same time ceremonies of
death and resurrection. Men have by now forgotten the
profound hidden struggle between consciousness and
the body that exists in courage, and physical courage in
particular. Consciousness is generally considered to be
passive, and the active body to constitute the essence of
all that is bole and daring; yet in the drama of physical
courage the roles are, in fact, reversed. The flesh beats
a steady retreat into its function of self-defense, while it
is clearly consciousness that controls the decision that
sends the body soaring into self-abandonment. It is the
ultimate in clarity of consciousness that constitutes one of
the strongest contributing factors in self-abandonment.
To embrace suffering is the constant role of physical
courage; and physical courage is, as it were, the source of
that taste for understanding and appreciating death that,
41
more than anything else, is a prime condition for making
true awareness of death possible. However much the
closeted philosopher mulls over the idea of death, so long
as he remains divorced from the physical courage that
is a prerequisite for an awareness of it, he will remain
unable even to begin to grasp it. I must make it clear
that I am talking of “physical” courage; the “conscience
of the intellectual” and “intellectual courage” are no
concern of mine here.
Nevertheless, the fact remains that I was living in
an age when the fencing sword was no longer a direct
symbol of the real sword, and the real sword in swordplay sliced through nothing but air. The art of fencing
was a summation of every type of manly beauty; yet,
insofar as that manliness was no longer of any practical
use in society, it was scarcely distinguishable from art
that depended solely on the imagination. Imagination
I detested. For me, fencing ought to be something
that admitted of no intervention by the imagination.
The cynics—well aware that there is nobody who
despises the imagination so thoroughly as the dreamer,
whose dreams are a process of the imagination—will,
I am sure, scoff at my confession in their own minds.
Yet my dreams became, at some stage, my muscles.
The muscles that I had made, that existed, might give
scope for the imagination of others, but no longer admitted of being gnawed away by my own imagination. I had
reached a stage where I was rapidly making acquaintance with the world of those who are “seen.”
If it was a special property of muscles that they
fed the imagination of others while remaining totally
devoid of imagination themselves, then in fencing I was
42
seeking to go one step further and achieve pure action
that admitted of no imagination, either by the self or
by others. Sometimes it seemed that my wish had been
fulfilled, at others that it had not. Yet either way, it was
physical strength that fought, that ran fleet of foot, that
cried aloud…
How did the groups of muscles, normally so heavy,
so dark, so unchangingly static, know the moment of
white-hot frenzy in action? I loved the freshness of the
consciousness that rippled unceasingly beneath spiritual
tension, whatever kind it might be. I could no longer
believe that it was purely an intellectual quality of my
own that the copper of excitement should be lined with
the silver of awareness. It was this that made frenzy
what it was. For I had begun to believe that it was the
muscles—powerful, statically so well organized and so
silent—that were the true source of the clarity of my
consciousness. The occasional pain in the muscles of a
blow that missed the shield gave rise instantly to a still
tougher consciousness that suppressed the pain, and
imminent shortage of breath gave rise to a frenzy that
conquered it. Thus I glimpsed from time to time another
sun quite different from that by which I had been so long
blessed, a sun full of the fierce dark flames of feeling,
a sun of death that would never burn the skin yet gave
forth a still stranger glow.
This second sun was essentially far more dangerous
to the intellect than the first sun had ever been. It was
this danger more than anything else that delighted me.
43
What, now, of my dealings with words during this same
period? By now, I had made of my style something appropriate to my muscles: it had become flexible and free;
all fatty embellishment had been stripped from it, while
“muscular” ornament—ornament, that is, that though
possibly without use in modern civilization was still as
necessary as ever for purposes of prestige and presentability—had been assiduously maintained. I disliked a
style that was merely functional as much as one that
was merely sensuous.
Nevertheless, I was on an isolated island of my own.
Just as my body was isolated, so my style was on the
verge of non-communication; it was a style that did not
accept, but rejected. More than anything, I was preoccupied with distinction (not that my own style necessarily had it). My ideal style would have had the grave
beauty of polished wood in the entrance hall of a samurai
mansion on a winter’s day.
In my style, as hardly needs pointing out, I progressively turned my back on the preferences of the age.
Abounding in antitheses, clothed in an old-fashioned,
weighty solemnity, it did not lack nobility of a kind; but
it maintained the same ceremonial, grave pace wherever
it went, marching through other people’s bedrooms with
precisely the same tread as elsewhere. Like some military
gentleman, it went about with chest out and shoulders
back, despising other men’s styles for the way they
44
stooped, sagged at the knees, even—heaven forbid!—
swayed at the hips.
I knew, of course, that there are some truths in this
world that one cannot see unless one unbends one’s
posture. But such things could well be left to others.
Somewhere within me, I was beginning to plan a
union of art and life, of style and the ethos of action. If
style was similar to muscles and patterns of behavior,
then its function was obviously to restrain the wayward
imagination. Any truths that might be overlooked as a
result were no concern of mine. Nor did I care one jot
that the fear and horror of confusion and ambiguity
eluded my style. I had made up my mind that I would
select only one particular truth, and avoid aiming at any
all-inclusive truth. Enervating, ugly truths I ignored;
by means of a process of diplomatic selection within the
spirit, I sought to avoid the morbid influence exerted on
men by indulgence in the imagination. Nevertheless, it
was dangerous, obviously, to underestimate or ignore its
influence. There was no telling when the sickly forces
of an invisible imagination, still lying in wait, might
launch their cowardly assault from without the carefully
arrayed fortifications of style. Day and night, I stood
guard on the ramparts. Occasionally, something—a red
fire—would flare up like a signal on the dark plain
stretching endlessly into the night before me. I would
try to tell myself that it was a bonfire. Then, as suddenly
as it had appeared, the fire would vanish again. As guard
and weapon against imagination and its henchman sensibility, I had style. The tension of the all-night watch,
whether by land or by sea, was what I sought after in
my style. More than anything, I detested defeat. Can
45
there be any worse defeat than when one is corroded and
seared from within by the acid secretions of sensibility
until finally one loses one’s outline, dissolves, liquefies;
or when the same thing happens to the society about
one, and one alters one’s own style to match it?
Everyone knows that masterpieces, ironically enough,
sometimes arise from the midst of such defeat, from the
death of the spirit. Though I might retreat a pace and
admit such masterpieces as victories, I knew that they
were victories without a struggle, battleless victories of
a kind peculiar to art. What I sought was the struggle
as such, whichever way it might go. I had no taste for
defeat—much less victory—without a fight. At the same
time, I knew only too well the deceitful nature of any
kind of conflict in art. If I must have a struggle, I felt
I should take the offensive in fields outside art; in art,
I should defend my citadel. It was necessary to be a
sturdy defender within art, and a good fighter outside
it. The goal of my life was to acquire all the various
attributes of the warrior.
During the postwar period, when all accepted values
were upset, I often thought and remarked to others that
now if ever was the time for reviving the old Japanese
ideal of a combination of letters and the martial arts, of
art and action. For a while after that, my interest strayed
from that particular ideal; then, as I gradually learned
from the sun and the steel the secret of how to pursue
words with the body (and not merely pursue the body
with words), the two poles within me began to maintain
a balance, and the generator of my mind, so to speak,
switched from a direct to an alternating current. My
mind devised a system that by installing within the self
46
two mutually antipathetic elements—two elements that
flowed alternately in opposite directions—gave the appearance of inducing an ever wider split in the personality, yet in practice created at each moment a living
balance that was constantly being destroyed and brought
back to life again. The embracing of a dual polarity
within the self and the acceptance of contradiction and
collision—such was my own blend of “art and action.”
In this way, it seemed to me, my long-standing interest in the opposite of the literary principle began for
the first time to beat fruit. The principle of the sword,
it seemed, lay in its allying death not with pessimism
and impotence but with abounding energy, the flower
of physical perfection, and the will to fight. Nothing
could be farther removed from the principle of literature.
In literature, death is held in check yet at the same
time used as a driving force; strength is devoted to the
construction of empty fictions; life is held in reserve,
blended to just the right degree with death, treated
with preservatives, and lavished on the production of
works of art that possess a weird eternal life. Action—
one might say—perishes with the blossom; literature is
an imperishable flower. And an imperishable flower, of
course, is an artificial flower.
Thus to combine action and art is to combine the
flower that wilts and the flower that lasts forever, to
blend within one individual the two most contradictory
desires in humanity, and the respective dreams of those
desires’ realization. What, then, occurs as a result?
To be utterly familiar with the essence of these two
things—of which one must be false if the other is true—
and to know completely their sources and partake of their
47
mysteries, is secretly to destroy the ultimate dreams of
one concerning the other. When action views itself as
reality and art as falsehood, it entrusts this falsehood
with authority for giving final endorsement to its own
truth and, hoping to take advantage of the falsehood, sets
it in charge of its dreams. It is thus that epic poems came
to be written. On the other hand, when art considers
itself as the reality and action as the falsehood, it once
more envisages that falsehood as the peak of its own
ultimate fictional world; it has been forced to realize that
its own death is no longer backed up by the falsehood,
that hard on the heels of the reality of its own work
came the reality of death. This death is a fearful death,
the death that descends on the human being who has
never lived; yet he can at least dream, ultimately, of the
existence in the world of action—the falsehood—of a
death that is other than his own.
By the destruction of these ultimate dreams I mean
the perception of two hidden truths: that the flower of
falsehood dreamed of by the man of action is no more
than an artificial flower; and, on the other hand, that the
death bolstered up by falsehood of which art dreams in
no way confers any special favors. In short, the dual approach cuts one off from all salvation by dreams: the two
secrets that should never by rights have been brought
face to face see through each other. Within one body, and
without flinching, the collapse of the ultimate principles
of life and of death must be accepted.
One may well ask if it is possible for anyone to live
this duality in practice. Fortunately, it is extremely rare
for the duality to assume its absolute form; it is the kind
of ideal that, if realized, would be over in a moment. For
48
the secret of this inwardly conflicting, ultimate duality
is that, though it may make itself constantly foreseen in
the form of a vague apprehension, it will never be put to
the test until the moment of death. Then—at the very
moment when the dual ideal that offers no salvation is
about to be realized—the person who is preoccupied
with this duality will betray that ideal from one side or
the other. Since it was life that bound him to the ruthless
perception of that ideal, he will betray that perception
once he finds himself face to face with death. Otherwise,
death for him would be unbearable.
As long as we are alive, however, we may dally with
any type of outlook we choose, a fact that is borne out
by the constant deaths in sport and the refreshing rebirths that follow. Victory where the mind is concerned
comes from the balance that is achieved in the face of
ever-imminent destruction.
Since my own mind was forever beset by boredom, all
but the most difficult, virtually impossible tasks failed
by now to arouse its interest. More specifically, it was
no longer interested in anything save the dangerous
type of game in which the mind put itself in peril—in
the game, and in the refreshing “shower” that followed.
At one time, one of the aims of my mind was to
know how the man with a massive physique felt about
the world around him. This was obviously a problem
too great for mere knowledge to handle, for though
knowledge may penetrate the darkness by using the
many creeping vines of sensation and intuition as guide
ropes, here the vines themselves were uprooted; the
source that sought to know belonged to me, while the
49
right to the inclusive sense of existence was granted to
the other side.
A little thought will make this clear. The sense of
existence of a man with a massive physique must, in
itself, be of the kind that embraces the whole world; for
that man, considered as a object of knowledge, everything outside himself (including me) must necessarily be
transferred onto the objective outside world experienced
by bis senses. No accurate picture can be grasped under
such circumstances unless one responds with a still more
embracing awareness. It is like trying to know how the
native of another country experiences existence; in
such a case, all we can do is to apply inclusive, abstract
concepts such as mankind, universal humanity, and so
on, and to make deductions using these hypothetical
yardsticks. This, however, is not an exact knowledge,
but a method that leaves the ultimately unknowable
elements untouched and deduces by analogy with the
other, shared elements. The real question is staved off;
the things one “really wants to know” are shelved. The
only other alternative is for the imagination to take over
unashamedly and adorn the other side with a whole
variety of poems and fantasies.
For me, however, all fantasy suddenly vanished. My
bored mind had been chasing after the unintelligible
when, abruptly, the mystery disintegrated ... Suddenly,
it was I who had a fine physique.
Thus, those who had been on the other side of the
stream were here, on the same side as myself. The riddle
had gone; death remained the only mystery. And since
this freedom from riddles had been in no way a product
of the mind, the latter’s pride was terribly hurt Some-
50
what defiantly, it began to yawn once more, once more
began to sell itself to the detested imagination, and the
only thing that belonged eternally to the imagination
was death.
Yet, where is the difference? If the deepest sources of
the morbid imagination that falls on one by night —of
the voluptuous imagination, inducer of sensual abandon—he, one and all, in death, how does that death differ from the glorious death? What distinguishes the
heroic from the decadent death? The dual way’s cruel
withholding of salvation proves that they are ultimately
the same, and that the literary ethic and the ethic of
action are no more than pathetic efforts of resistance
against death and oblivion.
What difference there might be resolves itself into the
presence or absence of the idea of honor, which regards
death as “something to be seen,” and the presence or
absence of the formal aesthetic of death that goes with
it—in other words, the tragic nature of the approach
to death and the beauty of the body going to its doom.
Thus, where a beautiful death is concerned, men are
condemned to inequalities and degrees of fortune commensurate with the inequalities and degrees of fortune
bestowed on them by fate at their birth—though this
inequality is obscured nowadays by the fact that modern
man is almost devoid of the desire of the ancient Greeks
to live “beautifully” and die “beautifully.”
Why should a man be associated with beauty only
through a heroic, violent death ? In ordinary life, society
maintains a careful surveillance to ensure that men shall
have no part in beauty; physical beauty in the male,
when considered as an “object” in itself without any
51
intermediate agent, is despised, and the profession of the
male actor—which involves constantly being “seen”—is
far from being accorded true respect. A strict rule is
imposed where men are concerned. It is this: a man
must under normal circumstances never permit his own
objectivization; he can only be objectified through the
supreme action—which is, I suppose, the moment of
death, the moment when, even without being seen, the
fiction of being seen and the beauty of the object are
permitted. Of such is the beauty of the suicide squad,
which is recognized as beauty not only in the spiritual
sense but, by men in general, in an ultra-erotic sense also.
Moreover, serving as agent in this case is a heroic action
of an intensity beyond the resources of the ordinary
mortal, so that “objectivization” without an agent is not
possible here. However close mere words may get to this
moment of supreme action that acts as intermediary for
beauty, they can no more overtake it than a flying body
can attain the speed of light.
But what I was trying to describe here was not beauty.
To discuss beauty is to discuss the question “in depth.”
This was not my intention: what I sought to do was to
arrange a great variety of ideas like dice of hard ivory
and to set limits to the function of each.
I discovered, then, that the profoundest depths of the
imagination lay in death. It is natural, perhaps, that quite
apart from the necessity to prepare defenses against the
encroachments of the imagination, I should have conceived the idea of turning the imagination that had so
long tormented me back on itself, changing it into something that I could use as a weapon for counterattack.
However, where art as such was concerned, my style
52
had already built forts here, there, and everywhere,
and was successfully holding the encroachments of the
imagination in check. If I was to plan such a counterattack, it must take place in some field outside that of
art. It was this, more than anything else, that first drew
me towards the idea of the martial arts.
At one time, I had been the type of boy who leaned at
the window, forever watching out for unexpected events
to come crowding in towards him. Though I might be
unable to change the world myself, I could not but hope
that the world would change of its own accord. As that
kind of boy, with all the accompanying anxieties, the
transformation of the world was an urgent necessity for
me; it nourished me from day to day; it was something
without which I could not have lived. The idea of the
changing of the world was as much a necessity as sleep
and three meals a day. It was the womb that nourished
my imagination.
What followed in practice was in one sense a transformation of the world, in another it was not. Even though
the world might change into the kind I hoped for, it lost
its rich charm at the very instant of change. The thing
that lay at the far end of my dreams was extreme danger
and destruction; never once had I envisaged happiness.
The most appropriate type of daily life for me was a dayby-day world destruction; peace was the most difficult
and abnormal state to live in.
Unfortunately, I lacked the physical wherewithal to
cope with this. Wearing upon my sleeve a susceptibility
that knew no way of resistance, I watched out for the unexpected, telling myself that when it came I would accept
it rather than struggle with it. Much later, I realized
53
that if the psychological life of this excessively decadent
youth had happened to be backed up by strength and the
will to fight, it would have constituted a perfect analogy
with the life of the warrior. It was an oddly exhilarating discovery. In making it, I put within my grasp
the opportunity to turn the imagination back on itself.
If the only natural world for me was one in which
death was an everyday, self-evident matter, and if what
was natural to me was very easily attainable, not through
artificial devices, but by means of perfectly unoriginal
concepts of duty, then nothing could be more natural
than that I should gradually succumb to temptation
and seek to replace imagination by duty. No moment is
so dazzling as when everyday imaginings concerning
death and danger and world destruction are transformed
into duty. To do this, however, required the nurturing
of the body, of the strength and will to fight, and the
techniques to fight with. Their development could be
entrusted to the same type of methods as had once
served to develop the imagination; for were not the
imagination and swordsmanship the same insofar as
they were techniques nurtured by a familiarity with
death ? Both were techniques, moreover, that led one
closer and closer towards destruction the more sensitive
they became.
I now realize that the kind of task in which to burnish
the imagination for death and danger comes to have the
same significance as burnishing the sword, had long
been calling to me from a distance; only weakness and
cowardice had made me avoid it.
To keep death in mind from day to day, to focus each
moment upon inevitable death, to make sure one’s worst
54
forebodings coincided with one’s dreams of glory…
if that was all, then it was sufficient to transfer to the
world of the flesh what I had long been doing in the
world of the spirit.
I have already written of how assiduously I was
making preparations for accepting such a wrenching
change, getting myself ready to accept it at any time. The
theory that anything could be recovered had come into
being within me. As it had become clear that even the
body— ostensibly the prisoner of time in its moment-tomoment growth and decline—could be recovered, then
it was not odd that I should conceive the idea of time
itself as recoverable.
For me, the idea that time was recoverable meant that
the beautiful death that had earlier eluded me had also
become possible. What was more, during the past ten
years I had learned strength, I had learned suffering,
battle, and self-conquest; I had learned the courage to
accept them all with joy.
I was beginning to dream of my capabilities as a
fighting man.
55
…It is a rather risky matter to discuss a happiness that
has no need of words.
The one thing I am sure can easily be deduced from
what I have written is that in order to bring about what
I refer to here as happiness, an extremely troublesome
set of conditions must first be fulfilled, and an extremely
complex set of procedures gone through.
The short period—one month and a half—of army
life that I later experienced yielded many glittering
fragments of happiness, but there is one of them—an
unforgettable, all-embracing sense of happiness that
I experienced at a moment in itself apparently quite
insignificant and quite unmilitary—that I feel compelled
to write of here. Although I was in the midst of a group
army life, this supreme sense of wellbeing came upon
me, as on every previous occasion in my life, when I
was quite alone.
It happened at dusk on May 25, a beautiful day in
early summer. I was attached to a parachute squad; the
day’s training was over; I had been for a bath, and was
on my way back to the dormitory.
The late afternoon sky was dyed in shades of blue and
pink, and the turf spread below was an even, glowing
jade. Here and there on either side of the path along
which
I walked stood the aging, robust, wooden buildings,
nostalgic souvenirs of an age when this had been the
56
cavalry school: the covered riding paddock, now a gymnasium, the stables, now a post-exchange…
I was still in my P.T. clothes: long white cotton training pants just issued that day, rubber gym shoes, a running shirt. Even the mud that already soiled the bottom
of the pants contributed to my sense of wellbeing.
That morning’s training in handling a parachute,
the extraordinarily rarified feeling as for the first time
one committed oneself to the empty air, still lingered
inside me, a transparent residue, fragile as a medicinal
wafer. The deep, rapid breathing caused by the circuit
training and running that followed had pervaded my
whole body with a pleasing lethargy. Rifles, weapons
of every kind, were at hand. My shoulder was ready
for slinging a gun at any time. I had run to my heart’s
content over the green grass, felt the sun burning my
skin a golden brown; beneath the summer sunlight, I had
seen, thirty-five feet below me, people’s shadows sharply
etched and firmly attached to their feet. I had jumped
into space from the summit of the silver tower, aware
as I went of how the shadow that I myself would cast
among them the next instant would lie isolated like a
black puddle on the earth, untied to my body. At that
moment I was, beyond all doubt, freed from my shadow,
from my self-awareness.
My day had been full to the brim of the body and of
action. There was physical excitement, and strength,
and sweat, and muscle; the green grass of summer
was everywhere, a breeze stirred the dust on the path
I walked along, the sun’s rays slowly slanted ever more
obliquely, and in my training pants and gym shoes
I walked amidst them quite naturally. Here was the life
57
I had wanted. At that time, I savored the same solitary,
rough-and-ready joy of the physical training instructor
walking back between the old school building and the
shrubbery after losing himself in the beauty of physical
training on a summer’s evening.
I sensed in it an absolute rest for the spirit, a beatification of the flesh. Summer, white clouds, the empty blue
of the sky following the final lesson of the day, and
the touch of nostalgic sadness tinging the glitter of
sunlight filtering through the trees, induced a sense of
intoxication. I existed.. . .
How complex were the procedures necessary to attain
this existence! Within it, a large number of concepts that
for me were close to fetishes achieved direct association
with my body and senses, quite independently of the
agency of words. The army, physical training, summer,
clouds, sunset, the green of summer grasses, the white
training suit, sweat, muscle, and just the faintest whiff of
death. . . . Nothing was lacking; every piece of the mosaic
was in place. I had absolutely no need of any others, and
thus no need of words. The world I was in was made
up of conceptual elements that were as pure as angels;
all foreign elements had been temporarily swept aside,
and I overflowed with the infinite joy of being one with
the world, a joy akin to that produced by cold water on
skin warmed by the summer sun.
58
…Quite possibly, what I call happiness may coincide with
what others call the moment of imminent danger. For
that world into which I blended without the medium of
words, filling myself thereby with a sense of happiness,
was none other than the tragic world. The tragedy, of
course, was at that moment still unfulfilled; yet all the
seeds of tragedy were within it; ruin was implicit in it;
it lacked entirely any “future.” Obviously, the basis of
my happiness was the joy of having completely acquired
the qualifications necessary to dwell therein. The basis
of my pride was the feeling that I had acquired this
precious passport, not through words, but through the
cultivation of the body and that alone. This world that
was the only place where I could breathe freely, that was
so utterly remote from the commonplace and lacking in
future—this world I had pursued unceasingly, ever since
the war had ended, with a burning sense of frustration.
But words had played no part in giving it to me; on
the contrary, they had spurred me on ever farther and
farther from it: for even the most destructive verbal
expression was but an integral part of the artist’s daily
task.
How ironical it was! At a period when the futureless
cup of catastrophe had been brimming over, I had not
been given the qualifications for drinking from it. I had
gone away, and when, after long training, I had returned
armed with those qualifications in fullest measure, it
was to find the cup drained, its bottom coldly visible,
59
and myself past forty. Unfortunately, moreover, the only
liquid that might quench my thirst was that which others
had drained before me.
Everything was not, as I had deluded myself, recoverable. Time was beyond recall after all. And yet, as I now
realized, the attempt to fly in the face of the relentless
march of time was perhaps the most characteristic feature of the way in which, since the war, I had sought
to live by committing every possible heresy. If, as was
commonly believed, time was indeed irreversible, was it
possible that I should be living here in this way ? I had,
indeed, good reason within myself to pose this question.
Refusing utterly to recognize the conditions of my
own existence, I had set about acquiring a different existence instead. Insofar as words, by endorsing my existence, had laid down the conditions for that existence,
the steps it was necessary to take to acquire another
existence involved flinging myself bodily on the side of
the phantom evoked and radiated by words; it meant
changing from a being that created words to one that
was created by words; it meant, quite simply, using
subtle and elaborate procedures in order to secure the
momentary shadow of existence. It was logical, indeed,
that I should have succeeded in existing only at one
solitary, selected moment of my short army life. The
basis of my happiness, obviously, lay in my having transformed myself, albeit for only a moment, into a phantom
formed by the shadows cast by fat-off, moldering words
from the past. By now, though, it was not words that
endorsed my existence. This type of existence that
derived from rejecting the endorsement of existence by
60
words, had to be endorsed by something different. That
“something different” was muscle.
The sense of existence that produced such an intense
happiness disintegrated, of course, a moment later, but
the muscles miraculously survived the disintegration.
Unfortunately, however, a mere sense of existence is
not enough to make one perceive that the muscles have
escaped dissolution; one needs to afford proof of one’s
muscles with one’s own eyes, and seeing is the antithesis
of existing.
The subtle contradiction between self-awareness and
existence began to trouble me.
I reasoned that if one wants to identify seeing and
existing, the nature of the self-awareness should be made
as centripetal as possible. If only one can direct the eye
of self-awareness so intently towards the interior and
the self that self-awareness forgets the outer forms of
existence, then one can “exist” as surely as the “I” in
Amiel’s Diary. But this existence is of an odd kind, like
a transparent apple whose core is fully visible from the
outside; and the only endorsement of such existence lies
in words. It is the classical type of existence experienced
by the solitary, humanistic man of letters. . . .
But one also comes across a type of self-awareness
that concerns itself exclusively with the form of things.
For this type of self-awareness, the antinomy between
seeing and existing is decisive, since it involves the
question of how the core of the apple can be seen through
the ordinary, red, opaque skin, and also how the eye
that looks at that glossy red apple from the outside
can penetrate into the apple and itself become the core.
61
The apple in this case, moreover, must have a perfectly
ordinary existence, its color a healthy red.
To continue the metaphor, let us picture a single,
healthy apple. This apple was not called into existence
by words, nor is it possible that the core should be completely visible from the outside like Amiel’s peculiar fruit.
The inside of the apple is naturally quite invisible. Thus
at the heart of that apple, shut up within the flesh of the
fruit, the core lurks in its wan darkness, tremblingly
anxious to find some way to reassure itself that it is a
perfect apple. The apple certainly exists, but to the core
this existence as yet seems inadequate; if words cannot
endorse it, then the only way to endorse it is with the
eyes. Indeed, for the core the only sure mode of existence
is to exist and to see at the same time. There is only one
method of solving this contradiction. It is for a knife to
be plunged deep into the apple so that it is split open
and the core is exposed to the light—to the same light,
that is, as the surface skin. Yet then the existence of
the cut apple falls into fragments; the core of the apple
sacrifices existence for the sake of seeing.
When I realized that the perfect sense of existence
that disintegrated the very next moment could only be
endorsed by muscle, and not by words, I was already
personally enduring the fate that befell the apple. Admittedly, I could see my own muscles in the mirror. Yet
seeing alone was not enough to bring me into contact
with the basic roots of my sense of existence, and an
immeasurable distance remained between me and the
euphoric sense of pure being. Unless I rapidly closed
that distance, there was little hope of bringing that
sense of existence to life again. In other words, the self-
62
awareness that I staked on muscles could not be satisfied
with the darkness of the pallid flesh pressing about it
as an endorsement of its existence, but, like the blind
core of the apple, was driven to crave certain proof of its
existence so fiercely that it was bound, sooner or later,
to destroy that existence. Oh, the fierce longing simply
to see, without words!
The eye of self-awareness, used as it is to keeping a
watch on the invisible self in an essentially centripetal
fashion and via the good offices of words, does not
place sufficient trust in visible things such as muscles.
Inevitably, it addresses the muscles as follows:
“I admit you do not seem to be a illusion. But if so,
I would like you to show how you function in order to
live and move; show me your proper functions and how
you fulfill your proper aims.”
Thus the muscles start working in accordance with
the demands of self-awareness; but in order to make the
action exist unequivocally, a hypothetical enemy outside
the muscles is necessary, and for the hypothetical enemy
to make certain of its existence it must deal a blow to the
realm of the senses fierce enough to silence the querulous complaints of self-awareness. That, precisely, is
when the knife of the foe must come cutting into the
flesh of the apple—or rather, the body. Blood flows,
existence is destroyed, and the shattered senses give
existence as a whole its first endorsement, closing the
logical gap between seeing and existing… And this is
death.
In this way I learned that the momentary, happy
sense of existence that I had experienced that summer
63
sunset during my life with the army could be finally
endorsed only by death.
All these things, of course, had been foreseen, and
I knew too that the basic conditions for this madeto-order type of existence were none other than the
“absolute” and the “tragic.” Death began from the time
when I set about acquiring an existence other than that
of words. For however destructive a garb they might
assume, words were deeply bound up with my instinct
for survival, were a part of my very life. Was it not,
essentially, when I first felt the desire to live that I began
for the first time to use words effectively ? It was words
that would make me live on until I died a natural death;
they were the slow-moving germs of a “sickness unto
death.”
I have written above of the affinity between my own
illusions and those cherished by the warrior, and of my
sympathy for the type of task in which burnishing the
sword and burnishing the imagination for death and
danger came to the same thing. This was something
that made possible, through the agency of the flesh,
every metaphor of the spiritual world. And everything,
in fact, turned out just as expected.
Even so, the impression of enormous wasted effort
that hangs about an army in peacetime oppressed me.
Admittedly, this was due in large measure to the unfortunate nature of Japan’s foundling army that deliberately
keeps it far removed from any ideas of tradition or glory.
Yet it reminded me of the repeated process of charging a
vast battery that is eventually exhausted through normal
leakage and has to be recharged; the power it generates
is never used for any effective purpose. Everything is
64
devoted to the enormous hypothesis of a “coming war.”
Training plans are drawn up in fine detail, the troops
labor at their tasks, and the vacuum in which nothing
happens progresses from day to day; bodies that were
in peak condition yesterday have deteriorated ever so
slightly today; old age is progressively cleared away, and
youth replenished without intermission.
More clearly than ever before, I grasped the true
efficacy of words. It is this void in the present progressive tense with which they deal. This void of the
progressive, that may go on for ever while one waits for
an absolute that may never come, is the true canvas on
which words are painted. This can happen, moreover,
because words, in marking the void, dye it as irrevocably
as the gay colors and designs on Yuzen fabrics are fixed
once they are rinsed in the clear waters of Kyoto’s river,
and in doing so consume the void completely moment
by moment, becoming fixed in each instant, where they
remain. Words are over as soon as they are spoken, as
soon as they are written. Through the accumulation
of these “endings,” through the moment-to-moment
rupture of life’s sense of continuity, words acquire a
certain power. At the very least, they diminish to some
degree the overwhelming terror of the vast white walls
in the waiting room where we await the arrival of the
physician, the absolute. And in exchange for the way in
which, by marking off each moment, they ceaselessly
chop up life’s sense of continuity, they act in a way that
seems at least to translate the void into substance of a
kind.
The power to “bring to an end”—even though this
too may in itself be a fiction—is obviously present in
65
words. The lengthy accounts written by prisoners in
the condemned cell are a form of magic aimed at ending
from moment to moment a long period of waiting that
exceeds the limits of human endurance.
All we are left with is the freedom to choose which
method we will try out when brought face to face with
that void in the progressive tense, in the interval while
we await the “absolute”. Either way, we must make our
preparations. That these preparations should be referred
to as “spiritual development” is due to the desire that
lurks to a greater or lesser extent in all human beings
to fashion themselves, however unsuccessfully, in the
image of the “absolute” to come. It is perhaps the most
natural and decent of all desires, this wish that body
and spirit alike should come to resemble the absolute.
Such a design, however, invariably ends in total failure. For however prolonged and intense the training,
the body, inevitably, progresses little by little towards
decay; however much one piles up verbal action, the
spirit will not know the end. The spirit, having already
lost its sense of the continuity of life as a result of the
moment-to-moment ends imposed on it by words, can
no longer distinguish a true end.
It is “time” that is responsible for this frustration and
failure, yet very occasionally that same time confers a
favor and rescues the project. Here lies the mysterious
significance of an early death, which the Greeks envied
as a sign of the love of the gods.
I, however, had already lost the morning face that
belongs to youth alone—the face that, however deep it
has sunk in the stagnant depths of fatigue the previous
night, rises fresh and alive to breathe at the surface in
66
the morning. In most people, alas, the unsophisticated
habit of exposing the face, quite unconsciously, to the
dazzling light of the morning persists to the end. The
habit remains, the face changes. Before one realizes it,
the true face is ravaged by anxiety and emotion; one
does not perceive that it drags last night’s fatigue like
a heavy chain, nor does one realize the boorishness of
exposing such a face to the sun. It is thus that men lose
their manliness.
The reason is that once it has lost the natural brightness of youth, the manly face of the warrior must needs
be a false face; it must be manufactured as a matter of
policy. The army, I found, made this quite clear. The
morning face presented by a commanding officer was a
face for people to read things into, a face in which others
might immediately find a criterion for the day’s action. It
was an optimistic face, designed to cover up the individual’s private weariness and, no matter what despair he
might be plunged into, to encourage others; it was thus
a false face full of energy, spurning and shaking off the
bad dreams of the previous night. And it was the only
face with which men who lived too long could make
obeisance to the morning sun.
In this respect, the face of the intellectual whose
youth was past horrified me: it was ugly and impolitic…
Having concerned myself from the outset of my literary life with methods for concealing rather than revealing
myself, I marveled at the function of the uniform in the
army. Just as the finest cloak of invisibility for words is
muscle, so the finest cloak of invisibility for the body
is the uniform. The military uniform, however, is made
67
in such a way that it refuses to suit a scrawny body or
a protruding belly.
The individuality as pared down by a uniform had,
I found, an extraordinary simplicity and clearcut quality.
In the eyes of others, the man who donned a uniform
became thereby, quite simply, a combatant.
Whatever his personality and private thoughts, whether he was a dreamer or a nihilist, whether magnanimous or parsimonious, however vast the gulf of sordidness that yawned beneath his uniform, however full he
might be of vulgar ambition, he was still, quite simply,
a combatant. Sooner or later, the uniform would be
pierced by a bullet and stained with blood; in this respect, it matched remarkably well the special quality of
muscles whereby self-endorsement inevitably meant
self-destruction.
68
…For all that, though, I was in no sense a military man
myself. The army is a profession that requires a great
deal of technique. As I saw and noted well for myself, it
demands, more than any other profession, a long period
of careful training. In order not to lose the techniques
once they are acquired, constant and unrelaxing practice
is necessary, much as a pianist must practice every day
in order not to lose his delicacy of touch.
Nothing gives the armed forces so much attraction as
the fact that even the most trivial duty is ultimately an
emanation of something far loftier and more glorious,
and is linked, somewhere, with the idea of death. The
man of letters, on the other hand, must scratch together
his own glory from the rubbish within himself, already
overfamiliar in every detail, and refurbish it for the
public eye.
Two different voices constantly call to us. One comes
from within, the other from without. The one from
without is one’s daily duty. If the part of the mind that
responded to duty corresponded exactly with the voice
from within, then one would indeed be supremely happy.
On a May afternoon of unseasonably cold drizzle, I
was alone in the dormitory, the firing practice that I had
been due to witness having been cancelled on account of
the rain. It was chilly there on the plain skirting the foot
of Mt. Fuji, more like a winter’s day than early summer.
On such a day, tall city buildings where men worked
would be aglow with lights even in the daytime, and the
69
women at home would be knitting by artificial light, or
watching the television, perhaps repenting having put
the gas fires away too soon. Ordinary bourgeois life held
no force sufficiently compelling to drag one out into the
chill drizzle without so much as an umbrella.
Unexpectedly, a non-commissioned officer arrived
in a jeep to fetch me. The firing practice, he explained,
was going ahead despite the rain.
The jeep drove steadily along the potholed road
across the plain, lurching violently as it went.
Not a soul was in sight on the plain. The jeep climbed
a slope down which the rain washed in sheets, and drove
down the other side again. Visibility was restricted, the
wind gathered strength, and the clumps of grass bowed
down before it. From a gap in the hood, the cold rain
beat mercilessly on my cheeks.
I was glad that they had come from the plain to fetch
me on such a day. It was an emergency duty, a voice
summoning me lustily from afar. The feeling of hastily
leaving a warm lair in response to a voice calling from
across the vast rain-blurred plain had a primitive appeal
that I had not savored for many a day.
On such occasions, something unknown compels me,
almost tears me away from the warm fireside. There is
no reluctance or hesitation: I gladly go to meet the messenger from the ends of the earth (in most cases he has
some connection with death or pleasure or instinct) and,
in the instant of my departure, I abandon everything
that is comfortable and familiar. I had, I felt, savored just
such a moment long ago in the distant past.
In the past, though, the voice that had called me from
without had not corresponded precisely to the voice
70
from within. This, I believe, is because I was unable to
meet the call from without with my body, managing
barely to do so with words instead. I was familiar, it is
true, with the sweet pain that occurred when it became
entangled in the complex mesh of ideas, but I was ignorant as yet of the deep-rooted joy produced when the two
types of summons, meeting in the body, find themselves
perfectly matched.
Before long, there came the high-pitched whine of
the guns, and I caught sight of the bright orange tracer
shells being fired, with repeated corrections for error,
at targets half obscured by the drifting rain. The next
hour I spent sitting in the mire, with the rain beating
down on me.
…I recall another memory.
I was running alone, one December 14, on the main
track of the National Stadium beneath the first glimmerings of dawn. In reality, this kind of behavior was no
more than a fictional “task”—a piece of drunken excess,
one might well call it—yet I have never felt so keenly
that I was enjoying the ultimate in extravagance, nor
have I ever felt so sure that the daybreak belonged to
me alone.
It was a freezing dawn. The National Stadium was
a great lily of which the vast arena, utterly deserted,
formed the overblown, speckled, greyish-white petals.
I wore only a running shirt and pants; the morning
breeze struck chill to the bone; my hands were soon
numb. As I passed the gloom in front of the stands on
the east side, the cold was daunting; the west side, on
which the first rays of the sun were already striking,
71
was more bearable. I had circled the 400-meter track
four times, and was on my fifth time round.
The sun peering over the top of the stands was still
intercepted by the edge of the lily’s petals, and the magenta of a reluctant dawn still lingered in the sky. The
east side of the stadium, was touched by the last of the
cold night-breeze.
As I ran, I breathed not only the knife-sharp air
but the lingering aroma of the dawn. The tumult, the
cries of joy from the stands, the smell of athlete’s lotion
heightened by the morning chill, the pounding of red
hearts, the fierce resolve—of such was compounded the
fragrance of that great lily, a fragrance that the stadium
had retained all through the night. And the brick red of
the track was, unmistakably, the color of the lily’s pollen.
As I ran, my mind was filled with one idea: the relationship between the voluptuous lily of dawn and the
purity of the body.
So completely did this difficult metaphysical problem
engross me that I went on running, oblivious to fatigue.
It was a problem that, somewhere deep down, related
to myself; it linked up with my boyhood hypocrisy concerning the purity and sanctity of the body; and it had
its bearing, I suspected, on the distant martyrdom of
Saint Sebastian.
The reader is asked to notice that I say nothing of
my own everyday life. My intention is to talk only of the
several mysteries to which I have been party.
Running, too, was a mystery. It immediately placed
a non-routine burden on the heart, washing away the
emotions of the daily round. Before long, my blood
would not permit a halt of even a day or two. Some-
72
thing ceaselessly set me to work; my body could no
longer tolerate indolence, but began instantly to thirst
for violent action, forever urging me on. Thus for many a
day I led a life that others might well dismiss as frenzied
obsession. From the gymnasium to the fencing school,
from the school to the gymnasium. . . . My solace lay
more than anywhere—indeed lay solely—in the small
rebirths that occurred immediately after exercise. Ceaseless motion, ceaseless violent deaths, ceaseless escape
from cold objectivity—by now, I could no longer live
without such mysteries. And—needless to say—within
each mystery there lay a small imitation of death.
All unawares, I had embarked on a kind of pitiless
, round. My age pursued me, murmuring behind my
back “How long will it last ?” Yet so firmly was I in the
clutches of my healthy vice that to go back to the world
of words without the mystery of these rebirths was no
longer possible.
This does not imply, of course, that after my small
rebirths of the soul and the flesh I went back reluctantly,
with a sense of duty, to the world of words. On the contrary, this was the one procedure that ensured that
I should return to them joyfully and with a glad heart.
The demands I made on words became still more strict
and exacting. I shunned the latest styles like the plague.
Perhaps I was gradually seeking to rediscover the unsullied fortress of words that I had known during the war.
It may be that I was trying to reconstruct everything
according to the pattern that I had learned before, to
find once more my fortress of words—that paradoxical
base of freedom outside which I was forever threatened,
yet inside which I enjoyed an unparalleled freedom.
73
It was also an attempt to recapture the intoxication
I experienced, free from guilt about words, at that age
when I asked words to fulfill only the purest of functions.
And that meant trying to recover my own self as it had
been when eaten away by the white ants of words, and
to reinforce it with a sturdy body. It was an attempt to
restore a state of affairs in which words (however far they
might be from the truth) were for me the only source of
real happiness and freedom, much as a child will put a
backing of thick strong paper on a backgammon board
that long use has severed at the fold. It meant, in a
sense, a return to the poem without pain, a return to
my private Golden Age.
74
Was I ignorant, then, when I was seventeen ? I think
not. I knew everything. A quarter-century’s experience
of life since then has added nothing to what I knew. The
one difference is that at seventeen I had no “realism.”
How wonderful it would be, I felt, if I could only go
back to that omniscience in which I bathed as agreeably
as in cold water in summer! Examining myself in detail
as I was at that age, I found that the parts of me that
my words had without doubt “ended” were extremely
few, and that the areas polluted by the radiation of
omniscience were very restricted. The reason was that,
though I wanted to use words as a memorial, as my
bequest to posterity, I had got the method wrong: I was
cutting down on—even rejecting—omniscience, and
entrusting to words the whole of my rebellion against
the age. I was preoccupied with the task of making words
reflect my body, even though I had none, and of sending
them winging off towards the future, or towards death,
bearing my longings like a carrier pigeon bearing a
message in the silver tube attached to its small red leg.
Even though one might be justified in describing this
process as one designed not to let words come to an
end, there was, nevertheless, a kind of intoxication in it.
Earlier, I defined the essential function of words as a
kind of magic in which the long void spent waiting for
the absolute is progressively consumed by writing, much
as embroidery slowly covers the pure white of a long
sash. At the same time, I pointed out that the spirit—
75
which, chopped into lengths by words, has its natural
sense of the continuity of life constandy disrupted—is
unable to distinguish a true end, and thus never knows
an end at all.
If that is so, what function do words have for the spirit
when it finally does become aware of the end ?
An admirable example in miniature of what happens
in such a case is to be found in a collection of letters,
written by young men of the suicide squad before setting
off on their last mission, that is preserved today at the
former naval base of Etajima.
Visiting the museum one late summer’s day, I was
struck by the remarkable contrast between the majority
of letters, which were written in an impressive, orderly
style, and the occasional letter rapidly dashed off in
pencil. As I stood before the glass cases reading the last
testaments of these young heroes, I felt suddenly that
I had resolved a question that had long worried me: at
such times, did men use words to tell the truth, or did
they try to make of them some memorial ?
One letter that still remains very vivid in my mind was
written in pencil on a piece of rice-paper in a youthful,
almost careless scribble. If my memory is not mistaken,
it was to the following effect, and broke off abruptly in
just this fashion:
“At the moment I am full of life, my whole body overflowing with youth and strength. It seems impossible
that I shall be dead in three hours’ time. And yet…”
When someone seeks to tell the truth, words always
falter in this way. I can almost see him now, fumbling for
words: not from shyness, nor from fear, for the naked
truth inevitably produces this verbal stumbling; but,
76
rather, as a sign of a certain rough quality about truth
itself. The young man in question had no long-drawnout void left in which to await the absolute, nor did he
have time to wind things up with words in a leisurely
way. As he hurtled towards death, his final everyday
phrases seized on a moment when the feeling for life,
like chloroform in the strange headiness it produces, had
temporarily benumbed his spirit’s awareness of the end,
and, like a well-loved dog leaping up at its master, came
rushing out upon him, only to be dashed rudely aside.
The neater letters, on the other hand, with their
pithy phrases about duty to one’s fatherland, destroying
the enemy, eternal right, and the identity of life and
death, obviously selected what were considered to be
the most impressive, the most noble from among a large
number of ready-made concepts, and clearly revealed
a determination, by eliminating anything in the way
of personal psychology, to identify the self with the
splendid words chosen.
The slogan-like phrases thus written were, of course,
in every sense “words.” But, ready-made though they
might have been, they were special words, set at a height
loftier than any commonplace action could ever attain.
Once there were such words, though they are lost to
us nowadays. They were not simply beautiful phrases,
but a constant summons to superhuman behavior, words
that demanded that the individual stake his very life
on the attempt to climb to their own lofty heights.
Words such as these, in which something first uttered
as a conscious resolve gradually comes to demand an
inescapable identification, lacked from the outset any
bridge that might link them with ordinary, everyday
77
preoccupations. More than any other words, and despite
the ambiguity of their sense and content, they were filled
with a glory not of this world; their very impersonality
and monumentality demanded the strict elimination of
individuality and spurned the construction of monuments based on personal action. If the concept of the
hero is a physical one, then, just as Alexander the Great
acquired heroic stature by modeling himself on Achilles,
the conditions necessary for becoming a hero must be
both a ban on originality and a true faithfulness to a
classical model; unlike the words of a genius, the words
of a hero must be selected as the most impressive and
noble from among ready-made concepts. And at the
same time they, more than any other words, constitute
a splendid language of the flesh.
In this way, then, I discovered in that museum the
two brave types of words used when the spirit has perceived its end.
Compared with these two, the works of my boyhood
failed to get to grips with the certainty of death; with
ample time to be poisoned by timidity, they were subject
in equal measure to the assaults of art. I used words in
a totally different way from those beautiful last testaments of the suicide corps. Nevertheless, it seems certain
that my spirit, for all the freedom—license, even—it
permitted to words, and for all the prodigality it permitted the youthful author in his use of them, was still,
somewhere, aware of the “end.” If one rereads those
works now, the signs are plain for all to see.
Nowadays, I find myself speculating: the kind of life in
which words appear first, followed by the body already
corroded by words, was surely not confined to myself
78
alone? I was surely, somewhere, guilty of a contradiction
in rejecting my own uniqueness while affirming the uniqueness of my life as such; the unconscious education
of my body should have made the contradiction quite
plain to me. At that period, then, the “end” that the
body foresaw and the spirit perceived must have been
present in the suicide corps and myself in equal measure.
I ought to have been able (even without the body!) to
take up a stand at some point that left no doubt as to that
identity, and among the young men who died—even,
indeed, among the suicide corps—there were, beyond
doubt, some who were eaten away by the white ants in
the same way as myself. Those who died, however, were
fortunately secure within a fixed identity, an identity
established beyond all doubt—the tragic identity.
My omniscience at seventeen could hardly have been
unaware of this. However, what I had begun was the
attempt to remove myself as far as possible from omniscience. Determined not to use even one of the materials
of which the age was built, I mistook obstinate persistence in my own views for purity; what was worse,
I mistook my method too, and sought to leave behind
a personal monument. How, though, could something
personal ever become a monument ? The basic reason
for this illusion is only too clear to me today; at that time
I held in contempt a life that could be ended by words.
Thus contempt and fear were synonymous in the eyes
of the boy that I was then. In all probability, I was afraid
of bringing it to an end with words, and yet, imagining
that imperishability for words lay in escaping as far as
possible from reality, I felt an intoxication in this fruitless
action. One might say that there was happiness—hope,
79
even—in the action. And when the war ended and the
spirit promptly ceased to be aware of the coming “end,”
the intoxication also ceased on the spot.
What, then, could be the real meaning of my attempt
at this late stage to return to the same point? Was it
freedom I was seeking? Or the impossible? Or did the
two things, possibly, come to the same thing?
What I was after, obviously, was a revival of the intoxication, and this time, in addition to the intoxication, I
was conceited enough to believe that my technique in
dealing with words was sufficiently practiced for me to
choose impersonal words, thereby enhancing their
function as a memorial and putting an end to life of my
own free will. This—it would be no exaggeration to
say— was the only revenge I could take on the spirit for
stubbornly refusing to perceive the “end.” I was loath to
take the same course as others who, when the body is
turning its steps towards its future decay, refuse to follow
it but silently tag along after the far blinder and more
stubborn spirit until they are completely deceived by it.
Somehow or other, I must make my spirit conscious
once more of the “end.” Everything started from there;
only there, it was clear, could I find a basis for true freedom. I must soak myself once more in the cold water of
my boyhood omniscience, fresh as a cold bath in summer,
the omniscience that the misapplication of words had
made me deliberately avoid; but this time I must give
expression to everything, including the water itself.
That such a return was impossible was obvious without my being told. Yet the impossibility stimulated my
mind in its boredom, and the mind, which could no
80
longer be aroused to action save by the impossible, was
beginning to have dreams of freedom.
I had already seen, in the paradox enacted by the body,
the ultimate form of the freedom that comes through
literature, the freedom that comes through words. Be
that as it may, that which had eluded me was not death.
It was tragedy that I had once let slip.
81
More accurately, what had eluded me was the tragedy
of the group, or tragedy as a member of the group. If
I had achieved identity with the group, participation in
tragedy would have been far easier, but from the outset
words had worked to drive me farther and farther from
the group. Moreover, feeling as I did that I lacked the
physical ability to blend with the group, and that I was
therefore constantly rejected by it, I desired somehow
to justify myself. It was this desire that led me to polish
words so assiduously, with the natural result that the
kind of words I dealt in constantly rejected the significance of the group. Or should I say that the rain of
words that fell so steadily within me during the period
when my existence was barely adumbrated, like a rain
that begins falling before the break of dawn, was, in
itself, a forecast of my inability to adapt to the group ?
The first thing I did in life was to build up a self amidst
that rain.
The intuition of my infancy—the intuitive sense that
the group represented the principle of the flesh—was
correct. To this day, I have never once felt the need to
amend it. But it was only in later years, when I first came
to know what I have called the dawn of the flesh— that
rosy vertigo that descends on one after grueling use of
the body and intense fatigue—that I began to perceive
the significance of the group.
The group was concerned with all those things that
could never emerge from words—sweat, and tears, and
82
cries of joy or pain. If one probed deeper still, it was
concerned with the blood that words could never cause
to flow. The reason perhaps why the testaments of the
doomed are oddly remote from individual expression,
impressing one rather with their stereotyped quality, is
that they are the words of the flesh.
At the moment when I first realized that the use
of strength and the ensuing fatigue, the sweat and the
blood, could reveal to my eyes that sacred, ever-swaying
blue sky that the shrine bearers gazed on together, and
could confer the glorious sense of being the same as
others, I already had a foresight, perhaps, of that as
yet distant day when I should step beyond the realm
of individuality into which I had been driven by words
and awaken to the meaning of the group.
There is, of course, such a thing as the language of
the group, but it is in no sense a self-sufficient language.
A speech, a slogan, and the words of a play all depend on
the physical presence of the public speaker, the campaigner, the actor. Whether it is written down on paper or
shouted aloud, the language of the group resolves itself
ultimately into physical expression. It is not a language
for transmitting private messages from the solitude of
one closed room to the solitude of another distant, closed
room. The group is a concept of uncommunicable shared
suffering, a concept that ultimately rejects the agency
of words.
For shared suffering, more than anything else, is the
ultimate opponent of verbal expression. Not even the
mightiest Weltschmerz in the heart of the solitary writer,
billowing upwards to the starry heavens like some great
circus tent, can create a community of shared suffering.
83
For though verbal expression may convey pleasure or
grief, it cannot convey shared pain; though pleasure may
be readily fired by ideas, only bodies, placed under the
same circumstances, can experience a common suffering.
Only through the group, I realized—through sharing
the suffering of the group—could the body reach that
height of existence that the individual alone could never
attain. And for the body to reach that level at which the
divine might be glimpsed, a dissolution of the individuality was necessary. The tragic quality of the group
was also necessary—the quality that constantly raised
the group out of the abandon and torpor into which
it was prone to lapse, leading it on to ever-mounting
shared suffering and so to death, which was the ultimate
suffering. The group must be open to death—which
meant, of course, that it must be a community of
warriors…
In the dim light of early morning I was running, one
of a group. A cotton towel with the symbol of a red sun
on it was tied about my forehead, and I was stripped
to the waist in the freezing air. Through the common
suffering, the shared cries of encouragement, the shared
pace, and the chorus of voices, I felt the slow emergence,
like the sweat that gradually beaded my skin, of that
“tragic” quality that is the affirmation of identity. It was a
flame of the flesh, flickering up faintly beneath the biting
breeze—a flame, one might almost say, of nobility. The
sense of surrendering one’s body to a cause gave new
life to the muscles. We were united in seeking death and
glory; it was not merely my personal quest.
The pounding of the heart communicated itself to the
group; we shared the same swift pulse. Self-awareness
84
by now was as remote as the distant rumor of the
town. I belonged to them, they belonged to me; the
two formed an unmistakable “us.” To belong—what
more intense form of existence could there be? Our
small circle of oneness was a means to a vision of that
vast, dimly gleaming circle of oneness. And—all the
while foreseeing that this imitation of tragedy was, in the
same way as my own narrow happiness, condemned to
vanish with the wind, to resolve itself into nothing more
than muscles that simply existed—I had a vision where
something that, if I were alone, would have resolved
back into muscles and words, was held fast by the power
of the group and led me away to a far land, whence
there would be no return. It was, perhaps, the beginning
of my placing reliance on others, a reliance that was
mutual; and each of us, by committing himself to this
immeasurable power, belonged to the whole.
In this way, the group for me had come to represent
a bridge, a bridge that, once crossed, left no means of
return.
85
EPILOGUE—F104
Before my eyes, there slowly emerged a giant snake coiled
about the earth; a snake that by constantly swallowing
its own tail vanquished all polarities; the ultimate, huge
snake that mocks all opposites.
Opposites carried to extremes come to resemble each
other; and tilings that are farthest removed from each
other, by increasing the distance between them, come
closer together. This is the secret that the circle of the
snake expounded. The flesh and the spirit, the sensual
and the intellectual, the outside and the inside, will
remove themselves a pace from the earth, and high up,
higher even than where the snake-ring of white clouds
encircling the earth is joined, they too will be joined.
I am one who has always been interested only in the
edges of the body and the spirit, the outlying regions
of the body and the outlying regions of the spirit. The
depths hold no interest for me; I leave them to others,
for they are shallow, commonplace.
What is there, then, at the outermost edge? Nothing,
perhaps, save a few ribbons, dangling down into the void.
On earth, man is weighed down by gravity, his body
encased in heavy muscles; he sweats; he runs; he strikes;
even, with difficulty, he leaps. At times, nevertheless, I
have unmistakably seen, amidst the darkness of fatigue,
the first tinges of color that herald what I have called
the dawn of the flesh.
86
On earth, man wears himself out in intellectual adventures, as though seeking to take wing and fly to infinity. Motionless before his desk, he edges his way closer,
ever closer, to the borders of the spirit, in constant mortal danger of plunging into the void. At such times—
though very rarely—the spirit, too, has its glimpses of
the dawn light.
But body and spirit had never blended. They had
never come to resemble each other. Never had I discovered in physical action anything resembling the chilling,
terrifying satisfaction afforded by intellectual adventure.
Nor had I ever experienced in intellectual adventure the
selfless heat, the hot darkness of physical action.
Somewhere, the two must be connected. Where,
though ?
Somewhere, there must be a realm between, a realm
akin to that ultimate realm where motion becomes rest
and rest motion.
Suppose I flay about me with my arms. As I do so, I
lose a certain amount of intellectual blood. Suppose I
allow myself, however briefly, to think before I strike.
At that moment, my blow is doomed to failure.
Somewhere, I told myself, there must be a higher
principle that manages to bring the two together and
reconcile them.
That principle, it occurred to me, was death.
And yet, my idea of death was too mystical; I was
forgetting the plain, physical aspect of death.
The earth is surrounded by death. The upper regions,
where there is no air, are crowded with death pure and
unalloyed; it gazes down on humanity going about its
business far below and bound by its physical conditions
87
on earth, yet very seldom does it bring bodily death
to man, since those same physical conditions prevent
him from climbing this far. For man to encounter the
universe as he is, with uncovered countenance, is death.
In order to encounter the universe and still live, he must
wear a mask—an oxygen mask.
If one took the body to those same rarified heights
with which the spirit and intellect are already so familiar,
the only thing waiting for it there might well be death.
When the spirit and intellect ascend to such heights
alone, death does not reveal itself clearly. The spirit,
therefore, is always obliged, reluctantly and with a feeling of dissatisfaction, to return to its fleshly dwelling
on earth. When it ascends alone, the unifying principle
refuses to show itself. Unless body and spirit come together, the principle will have nothing to do with them.
At that stage, I had not encountered that giant snake.
Yet how familiar my intellectual adventures had
made me with the loftiest regions of the sky! My spirit
flew higher than any bird, unafraid of a lack of oxygen.
Possibly, even, it had no need in the first place of anything so rich as oxygen. How I laughed at them, those
grasshoppers who could jump no higher than their
bodies would take them! The mere sight of them, far
below me in the grass, would make me hold my sides
and shake with mirth.
Yet I had something to learn, even from the grasshoppers. I began to regret that I had never taken my
body with me into the upper regions, but had always left
it behind on earth, in its ponderous casing of muscle.
One day, I dragged my body with me into a pressure
chamber. Fifteen minutes of denitrification—the brea-
88
thing in, that is, of pure oxygen. My body was overwhelmingly astonished to find itself placed in the same
pressure chamber that my spirit entered every night, to
find itself bound immobile to a chair, forced to submit to
operations it had never imagined possible. Never had it
dreamed that its role would be reduced simply to sitting,
without moving hand or foot.
For the spirit, this was routine training in withstanding high altitudes, and presented no difficulties at all,
but for the body the experience was unprecedented. At
each breath, the oxygen mask clung to the nostrils, then
detached itself again. “Look here, body,” said the spirit.
“Today you’re going with me, without budging an inch,
to the highest limits of the spirit.”
“You’re wrong,” countered the body contemptuously.
“So long as I go with you, then however high they may
be, they’re the limits of the body too. You only say that,
you with your bookish knowledge, because you have
never taken the body with you before.”
But all such talk aside, we set off together, without
moving from the spot.
Already the air was being sucked out through the
small hole in the ceiling. An invisible lowering of the
pressure was slowly beginning.
The motionless cabin was ascending towards the
heavens. Ten thousand feet, twenty thousand feet.
Though to the eye nothing was happening inside the
cabin, that same cabin, at a frightening pace, was shaking
off its earthly chains. As the oxygen thinned out within
the cabin, so everything that was familiar and ordinary
began to recede. At around the thirty thousand feet
mark, some shadow seemed to be approaching, and my
89
breathing became the gasping of a dying fish frantically
opening and shutting its mouth on the surface of the
water. Yet still my nails showed no sign of the purple
of cyanosis.
Could the oxygen mask be working properly? Glancing at the “flow” window of the regulator, I could see
the white indicator moving slowly in a broad sweep at
each large, deep breath I took. The oxygen supply was
coming through. But suffocation was taking place as
the gases dissolved in the body were turning to bubbles.
So precise had been the resemblance between the
present physical adventure and intellectual adventure,
that so far I had not been alarmed. I had never supposed
that anything definite could happen to my motionless
body.
Forty thousand feet. The sense of suffocation increased still further. Hand in amicable hand with my body, my
spirit was searching frantically for any air that might
be left. Any air it found—even the smallest amount—it
would have devoured greedilv.
My spirit had known panic before now. It had known
apprehension. But it had never known this lack of an
essential element that the body normally supplied to it
without being asked. If I held my breath and tried to
think, my brain was immediately occupied—frantically
occupied with the creation of the physical conditions for
thought. And in the end it breathed again, though in the
manner of one committing a necessary error.
Forty-one thousand feet, forty-two thousand feet,
forty-three. ... I could feel death stuck fast to my lips.
Soft, warm, octopus-like death, a vision of dark death,
like some soft-bodied animal, such as my spirit had
90
never even dreamed of. My brain had not forgotten that
training would never kill me, yet this inorganic sport
gave me a glimpse of the type of death that crowded
about the earth outside. . . .
And then, a sudden free fall. The experience of hypoxia produced by removing one’s oxygen mask during
horizontal flight at twenty-five thousand feet. And the
experience of a sudden drop in pressure, when, with a
brief roaring sound, the interior of the cabin was suddenly enveloped in a white mist... . Finally, I passed my
test, and was given the small pink card certifying that I
had undergone physiological flight training. Soon, then,
I should have the chance to find out in what way the
edge of my spirit and the edge of my body would meet
and fuse together in a single shoreline.
The fifth of December was gloriously fine.
At the base, I could see the silver, gleaming forms
of the F104 supersonic fighter squadron lined up on
the airfield. Maintenance men were attending to 016, in
which I was to be taken aloft. It was the first time I had
seen the F104 so peacefully at rest. Often, with longing
eyes, I had watched it in flight. Acute-angled, swift as
a god, the F104 was no sooner seen than it had ripped
through the blue sky and vanished. I had long dreamed
of the moment when that speck in the sky would enfold
my own existence within it. What a mode of existence
it was! What glorious self-indulgence! Could there be
any more glittering insult to the stubbornly sedentary
spirit? How splendidly it ripped the vast blue curtain,
swift as a dagger-stroke! Who would not be that sharp
knife of the heavens ?
I donned the dun-colored flying suit and fastened on
91
my parachute. I was taught how to release my survival
kit, and had my oxygen mask tested. The heavy white
helmet would be mine for a while. And silver spurs were
fastened to the heels of my boots to prevent my legs
from springing up and breaking.
It was past two o’clock on the airfield now, and sunlight was falling and scattering from between the clouds
like water from a sprinkler truck. Clouds and light together were disposed according to the familiar convention
observed in depicting the sky over battle-scenes in old
paintings. From some heavenly coffer behind the clouds,
solemn shafts of light pierced through and fanned out
towards the earth. Why the heavens should have formed
such a vast, awe-inspiring, old-fashioned composition,
why the light should have been filled with such inner
weightiness, bringing a touch of divinity to distant
woods and hamlets, I do not know. They seemed to be
saying a mass for the soon-to-be-pierced sky.
I got into the rear seat of a two-seater fighter, fastened
the spurs on the heels of my boots, checked my oxygen
mask, and was covered with the hemispherical windshield glass. My dialogue with the pilot was interrupted
frequently by directions in English. Beneath my knees
rested the yellow ring of the ejection equipment, its
pin already out. Altimeters, speedometers, instruments
innumerable. The control stick that the pilot was testing
was duplicated in front of me, and the second stick vibrated furiously between my knees as he tested his.
Two twenty-eight. Engine started. At intervals through
the metallic thundering, I could hear, on a cosmic scale,
the pilot’s breathing within his mask heaving like a
typhoon. Two-thirty. Gently, 016 entered the runway and
92
stopped for a test with throttles fully open. I was filled
with happiness. The joy of setting off for a world that
was completely controlled by such things was something utterly different from the departure of an airliner,
which serves merely to transport bourgeois existence
from one place to another. For me, it was a farewell to
the everyday and the earthly.
How I had longed for this, how intensely I had looked
forward to this moment! Behind me lay nothing but the
familiar; before me lay the unknown—the present moment was the thinnest of razor blades between the two
states. How impatiently had I awaited the fulfilment of
this moment, how I had yearned for it to come under
conditions as strict and unalloyed as possible! It was
for this, surely, that I was alive. How could I fail to feel affection for those whose kindness had made this possible!
For many years I had forgotten the word “departure,”
forgotten it as a magician might try deliberately to
forget a fatal spell.
The takeoff of the F104 would be decisive. The upper
regions at 10,000 meters that the old Zero fighters
reached in fifteen minutes would be reached in a mere
two minutes. Plus-G would rest hard upon my body;
soon my vitals would be pressed down by an iron hand,
my blood flow as heavy as gold dust. The alchemy of
my body would begin.
Erect-angled, the F104, a sharp silver phallus, pointed
into the sky. Solitary, spermatozoon-like, I was installed
within. Soon, I should know how the spermatozoon felt
at the instant of ejaculation.
The furthermost, the outermost, the most peripheral
sensations of the times in which we live are bound up
93
with the G that is the inevitable concomitant of space
flight. Almost certainly, the remotest extremities of
everyday sensation in our age blend with G. We live in
an age where the ultimate in what was once referred to
as the psyche resolves itself into G. All love and hate
that does not anticipate G somewhere in the distance
is invalid.
G is the physical compelling force of the divine; and
yet it is an intoxication that lies at the opposite extreme
from intoxication, an intellectual limit that lies at the
opposite extreme from the outer limit of the intellect.
The F104 took off. Its nose lifted, then lifted further.
Almost before I realized it, we were piercing the nearest
clouds.
Fifteen thousand feet, twenty thousand feet. The needles of the altimeter and speedometer spun like small,
dancing, white mice. Mach 0.9, almost the speed of
sound.
Finally, G came. But it came so gently that it was
pleasant rather than painful. For a moment, my chest
was empty, as though a cascade of water had descended
with a great rush and left nothing behind it. My field of
vision was monopolized by the sky, blue with a grayish
tinge. I felt as though we were taking a great bite of the
sky, chewing it and gulping it down. My. mind stayed
as fresh as ever. Everything was quiet, majestic, and
the surface of the blue sky was flecked with the semenwhite of clouds. Since I was not asleep, to say I awoke
would be wrong. Rather, I experienced an “awakening”
as though another layer had been torn rudely off my
wakefulness, leaving my spirit pure, unsullied as yet by
my contact. In the unsparing light of the windshield
94
glass I clenched my teeth against naked joy. My lips, I
am sure, were drawn back as though in pain.
I was one with the F104 that I had seen before in the
sky; I had transformed my being into this thing that I
had seen before my eyes. To men on earth, who until
a moment ago had numbered me amongst them, I had
become a receding existence; I dwelt at a point that was
now no more than a fleeting memory for them.
Nothing could be more natural than to imagine that
the notion of glory derived from the sun’s rays that
poured so mercilessly through the glass bubble of the
cockpit, from this utterly naked light. Glory was surely a
name given to just such a light—inorganic, superhuman,
naked, full of perilous cosmic rays.
Thirty thousand feet; thirty-five thousand feet.
A sea of clouds spread out far below, devoid of any
conspicuous irregularities, like a garden of pure white
moss. The F104 headed far out to sea to avoid sending
shock waves to earth, racing south as it approached the
speed of sound.
Two forty-three p.m. From thirty-five thousand feet
and a subsonic speed of mach 0.9, we climbed with a
slight vibration through the speed of sound, to mach
1.15, mach 1.2, and so to mach 1.3 at a height of forty-five
thousand feet.
Nothing happened.
The silver fuselage floated in the naked light, the
plane maintaining a splendid equilibrium. Once more it
became a closed, motionless room. The plane was not
moving at all. It had become, simply, an oddly-shaped
metal cabin floating quite still in the upper atmosphere.
No wonder, then, that the pressurized chamber on
95
earth could serve as an exact model of a spaceship. The
motionless thing becomes a precise archetype of the
most swiftly moving thing.
There was even no suffocating sensation. My mind
was at ease, my thought processes lively. Both the closed
room and the open room—two interiors so diametrically
opposed—could serve equally, I found, as dwellings for
the spirit of one and the same human being. If this stillness was the ultimate end of action—of movement—
then the sky about me, the clouds far below, the sea
gleaming between the clouds, even the setting sun,
might well be events, things, within myself. At this distance from the earth, intellectual adventure and physical
adventure could join hands without the slightest difficulty. This was the point that I had always been striving
towards.
This silver tube floating in the sky was, as it were,
my brain, and its immobility the mode of my spirit.
The brain was no longer protected by unyielding bone,
but had become permeable, like a sponge floating on
water. The inner world and the outer world had invaded
each other, had become completely interchangeable.
This simple realm of cloud, sea, and setting sun was a
majestic panorama, such as I had never seen before, of
my own inner world. At the same time, every event that
occurred within me had slipped the fetters of mind and
emotion, becoming great letters freely inscribed across
the heavens.
It was then that I saw the snake.
That huge—but the adjective is hopelessly inadequate —snake of white cloud encircling the globe, biting
its own tail, going on and on for ever.. ..
96
Anything that comes into our minds even for the
briefest of moments, exists. Even though it may not exist
at this actual moment, it has existed somewhere in the
past, or will exist at some time in the future. Here lies
the resemblance between the pressure chamber and the
space ship; the resemblance between my midnight study
and the interior of the F104, forty-five thousand feet
up in the sky. The flesh should glow with the pervading prescience of the spirit; the spirit should glow with
the overflowing prescience of the body. And my consciousness, that shone serene like duralumin, watched
over them all the while.
The black shoulders of Fuji loomed in silhouette
slightly to the right of the plane’s nose, gathering their
clouds in slovenly fashion about them. To the left, the
island of Oshima, the white smoke from its crater curdled
above it like yoghurt, lay in a sea that gleamed in the
setting sun.
Already we were below twenty-eight thousand feet.
If the giant snake-ring that resolves all polarities
came into my brain, then it is natural to suppose that it
was already in existence.
The snake sought eternally to swallow its own tail.
It was a ring vaster than death, more fragrant than
that faint scent of mortality that I had caught in the
compression chamber; beyond doubt, it was the principle
of oneness that gazed down at us from the shirring
heavens.
The voice of the pilot fell on my ears.
“We are going to lower our altitude and make for
Mount Fuji. We’ll circle the crater, then do a few rolls
97
and lazy eights. Then we’ll make for home, passing over
Lake Chuzenji on the way.”
Red lilies, reflections from the surface of the sea dyed
crimson by the sunset, glowed through rents in the sea
of cloud directly below. The crimson cast a glow within
the thick layer of vapor, staining it with color, dotting
it all over with red flowers.
98
ICARUS
Do I, then, belong to the heavens?
Why, if not so, should the heavens
Fix me thus with their ceaseless blue stare,
Luring me on, and my mind, higher
Ever higher, up into the sky,
Drawing me ceaselessly up
To heights far, far above the human?
Why, when balance has been strictly studied
And flight calculated with the best of reason
Till no aberrant element should, by rights, remain—
Why, still, should the lust for ascension
Seem, in itself, so close to madness ?
Nothing is that can satisfy me;
Earthly novelty is too soon dulled;
I am drawn higher and higher, more unstable,
Closer and closer to the sun’s effulgence.
Why do they burn me, these rays of reason,
Why do these rays of reason destroy me?
Villages below and meandering streams
Grow tolerable as our distance grows.
Why do they plead, approve, lure me
With promise that I may love the human
If only it is seen, thus, from afar—
Although the goal could never have been love,
Nor, had it been, could I ever have
Belonged to the heavens ?
99
I have not envied the bird its freedom
Nor have I longed for the ease of Nature,
Driven by naught save this strange yearning
For the higher, and the closer, to plunge myself
Into the deep sky’s blue, so contrary
To all organic joys, so far
From pleasures of superiority
But higher, and higher,
Dazzled, perhaps, by the dizzy incandescence
Of waxen wings.
Or do I then
Belong, after all, to the earth ?
Why, if not so, should the earth
Show such swiftness to encompass my fall?
Granting no space to think or feel,
Why did the soft, indolent earth thus
Greet me with the shock of steel plate?
Did the soft earth thus turn to steel
Only to show me my own softness ?
That Nature might bring home to me
That to fall, not to fly, is in the order of things,
More natural by far than that imponderable passion ?
Is the blue of the sky then a dream ?
Was it devised by the earth, to which I belonged,
On account of the fleeting, white-hot intoxication
Achieved for a moment by waxen wings ?
And did the heavens abet the plan to punish me?
To punish me for not believing in myself
Or for believing too much;
Too eager to know where lay my allegiance
Or vainly assuming that already I knew all;
100
For wanting to fly off
To the unknown
Or the known:
Both of them a single, blue speck of an idea ?